Introduction
With only 13 cards this is the lightest deck in the core box, and I've found I often exhaust it fully in my plays, especially as Picard or against the Burnham bot. More than half of the Ally cards self-log, meaning that you'll only get to use their abilities one time before they get logged. Although you can use some abilities to get to them again (controlling Memory Alpha, for example) often these are one-shot abilities before the card is logged and no longer useful. Sometimes the traits may be more valuable beamed than used as an Ally, but most of these abilities are usually helpful at some point in each captain's gameplay. Unless otherwise indicated below, every Ally scores three points. Here's my thoughts on each of the Ally cards.
↑ back to top Halkan Council
From the TOS episode "Mirror, Mirror", the Halkan Council of both the prime and mirror universes denied the Enterprise access to their Dilithium for fear that it would be used offensively. Thus, the thematic benefit of a free-play action of gaining three Dilithium, a benefit that can be repeated over multiple turns. The downside is that all it takes is one in-play card with an attack trait and it's getting logged. Right now, I think Halkan Council benefits Burnham and Picard the most, as the other four decks all have pretty strategies that fundamentally require attack cards in-play. Remember, clean-up happens before you discard your staging area, so you can't have an attack trait on any cards you played on this turn, in your fleet area, controlled locations, beamed cards, or duty officers, or you're logging the Halkan Council.
↑ back to top Bolians
A rare ally without a log effect, Bolians cost an action and provide a simple Influence and allow you to draw a card, then free play that card. This could be amazing or it could be underwhelming, especially if you don't want to play it right away or it doesn't have an action token cost. Still, they're a solid ally card that if nothing else gives some more influence.
↑ back to top Denobulans
Primarily represented by Dr. Phlox and introduced in Enterprise, the Denobulans have two actions, both of which will self-log the card. The first simply gains the player a Person card. The second requires three influence and allows for scanning three Person cards, resulting in a choice among the three drawn cards and the face up card. This is a decent way to choose from a spread of cards, which is self-evidently beneficial.
↑ back to top Tholians
An insectoid-like species from the TOS episode The Tholian Web, they're mostly framed as adversaries who are also key players in the Mirror universe episode of Enterprise ("In a Mirror, Darkly"). In addition to an Alien trait, they have a play action costing an action token. You may draw a card, then gain a Latinum and two Dilithium for each controlled location you have in play. This can be fantastic, especially if you've controlled at least 3-4 locations and are starting to wonder how you'll pay for Developments. I think Sisko can benefit pretty early from this (as he starts with a location and gets the wormhole fairly quickly) but so can most captains. It's just an issue of how long you'll wait to get it played.
↑ back to top Edosians
A species we have yet to see in live-action Trek (probably because of the whole three-arms thing), Edosians get an Alien trait and two play actions. The first is a free action which provides card draw of two, but you have to discard one of them. The second costs an action token and requires you to have five Influence. You then put three cards on the top of your deck and you get to choose between the top two encounters, after which the Edosians self-log. Considering that you can still use this card to gain cards, I think it's pretty universally useful. The key will be having enough cards to discard when you finally gain your encounter.
↑ back to top Emerald Chain
An Orion-Andorian post-Burn Alliance in the wake of a weakened Federation, the Emerald Chain also gets an Attack and Shady trait. Their action costs an action token and gains one military as well as stealing a Dilithium from your opponent. You also get to free-play a Business-trait card, and it doesn't log itself. Pretty great, and those traits can't be beat (especially as we get more Orion cards as David and Adam have alluded to).
↑ back to top Organians
Most well-remembered for brokering the Treaty of Organia between the Klingons and the Federation, the Organians were a non-corporeal species that had evolved past the need for bodies. Hence, their Anomaly and Transcendent trait in the game. If your research level is four or higher, you can enlist a Reserve card for an action token. If it is six or higher, you can enlist a Development and then log the Organians. If you're fortunate enough to have Picard or Burnham, you can make use of this pretty quickly.
↑ back to top Arin'Sen
If you wondered why the Arin'Sen had a Klingon trait, you aren't alone. Their homeworld was annexed by the Klingons, pillaged, then abandoned in Enterprise. They have a free play action that requires three military. For every Klingon you have in play (up to five), you can gain two Dilithium, one Latinum, or discard a card to gain a glory. Then the Arin'Sen self-log. Obviously this is great for Koloth, but with a number of Klingon traits in the market there's plenty of opportunity for other captains to use this card. And don't sleep on the discard part of it, especially for rushing the endgame by taking glory.
↑ back to top Karemma
Lots of business opportunities in the Gamma quadrant. The Karemma have the Dominion and Business traits, as they were allied with the Founders in the Dominion war but value commerce enough to continue relations with the Federation after the war (see Lower Decks). They have a free play action to gain one Latinum. Their other free play action requires three military, and you can spend two Latinum for another action token. I love this card, especially during a five-year-mission solo campaign with Sisko or Shran. Extra actions don't hurt, especially if you have the cards to play.
↑ back to top Bynars
I really considered translating this entry into binary, and I didn't, so you're all welcome. The Bynars are introduced in TNG as engineers (hence the trait) that work in twos and hijack the Enterprise-D to assist their home planet with what was essentially a cloud-backup. Both of their actions cost an action token and gain them a cargo while logging the card. The second one requires three research and allows for scanning three from the cargo deck (same as Denobulans, only for cargo).
↑ back to top Kelpiens
Introduced in Star Trek Discovery, Kelpiens allow you to return up to two Incidents from your hand or discard pile before self-logging. According to Saru, they are "biologically determined for one purpose and one purpose alone — to sense the coming of death." Hence the returning of Incidents, as they help you to avoid those complications. They score for Research focus.
↑ back to top Letheans
Introduced in DS9, Letheans are telepathic (hence the trait) and come up twice as villains working illegally around DS9. This card allows you to dismiss one of your opponent's duty officers, scan for a Shady card, and draw a cargo from your discard pile, for only an action token cost. The card then self-logs. It scores for a Military focus.
↑ back to top Suliban
Appearing in Enterprise as soldiers in the temporal cold war, the Suliban get the Alien and Time Travel traits. Their play action costs an action token, and allows you to discard a card to recall another non-time travel card from your staging area, and duplicate a play operation of an Ally from the market. As with all duplicate actions, if the selected ally self-logs, so will Suliban. Both abilities have the text "may" so you don't have to use the second ability if you're not ready to log Suliban. It scores for an Influence focus.
↑ back to top ← Back to Compendium
