Introduction
Repeating my disclaimer from the Person Deck guide: for all of these market cards, it is worth continually pointing out that benefits are circumstantial. A card can be valuable for its tags, table operations, points multipliers, and more. There are some cards that do stand out above the rest, and I find myself pursuing most games regardless of my chosen captain. I will try to give some context to the particular captains who benefit from particular cards more than others, but it might need to be something I delve into more in the future. There are 16 cargo cards in the base game of ST:CC (17 if you count the Sehlat promo, which is included below), and without any more delay, here are my thoughts on them, in no particular order. As a quick note, all cards have two printed points on them unless otherwise indicated.
↑ back to top Holosuite
DS9's Holosuites start us off with the rare Hologram tag right along with Business. Two action choices here, that sort of play off each other. You can gain two Latinum, refresh your Duty Officer after a tough shift of patrolling the Promenade, and junk a market card. All three in one card offer a lot of flexibility. The other play action allows you to scan for a Person, Cargo, or Ally — the number of which depends on the Latinum paid. Pay more than 2 and you draw the card to your hand, which opens up a lot of possibilities. The strongest play here would be to just take something you want to play this turn from the market, but if nothing looks that great it could be worth the scan draw. As long as you have the Latinum to fund it this is a pretty great card, and you could even log some directives and just use this to gain Person, Cargo, or Ally cards.
↑ back to top Phasers
Another two-action card, you can alternatively use Phasers for card draw or for gaining another action token, which itself doesn't cost an action but does require 4 military skill. Both options allow you to junk a market card. There's also a reaction that allows you to ignore an effect that dismisses an away team, which is about the perfect defense to an attack card. Ongoing cards are nice to have just ready to go, but this one has strong abilities so there's a positive angle to having to use it to defend then dismiss.
↑ back to top Type III Disruptor Pistols
Pretty straightforward Romulan weapon, the Disruptor Pistol costs an action, gains a military skill, and junks a market card. But, if you have a Klingon, Romulan, or Breen in your hand, you can discard it to remove two opponent away teams from the same location and gain a glory for each. This reminds me of Star Trek Generations when Worf comments that the blasts are from Type III disruptors, with Riker narrowing it down to Klingons, Romulans, or Breen. It's not long before the Romulans are confirmed, but that line will always stick with me because they repeated it in the Star Trek Generations PC game that was basically my only computer game as a kid.
↑ back to top Horta
I've got to admit that the original series episode with the Horta was not one I remembered, if I'd seen it at all previously. This card allows for junking a market card (a pretty common cargo ability). Then, you can log an attack to enlist a development and deploy the card. If that's all the Horta did, that would be great, and thematically it's great as you're becoming less aggressive with the Horta which opens up mining. But the reaction is also fantastic, giving you an extra two Dilithium after you gain any Dilithium. It is a reaction, so it's not repeatable, but it's still a great boon that just requires four research skill. I also like to grab this in case I get stuck with the Whale Probe Incident, since there aren't a ton of creatures around.
↑ back to top Tribbles
Speaking of creatures, that Classic Trek furball, the Tribbles, make for a nice thematic event card. For an action token, you gain an Influence and Latinum with a market junk. Your opponent takes an incident, and if they dismissed a Klingon duty officer, they discard a card. This can be devastating against Koloth, but otherwise you're hoping for your opponent to either be Picard with Worf, or have picked up a Klingon from the person deck. Still, gotta love the tribbles.
↑ back to top Forced Singularity
While I have several episodes in mind with singularities, the one that this card reminds me of is the episode Timescape, where the Romulans experience a shipwide issue due to trans-dimensional species mistaking their artificial singularity drive for a natural one, like a black hole. This card reflects that pretty well, as it lets you find an Engineer or Ops card and for 2 Dilithium you can deploy the card to market, plus a market junk. The passive ability is probably the most useful, allowing an additional person on duty once you have 3 Military skill. You also can discard an engineer to draw two cards and put one on your deck, which is essentially just a way to ditch Rom for something potentially better while knowing what else is coming next. This card gains endgame points for a Research Focus, which is kind of in counter to the military requirement of the passive ability, but I really like getting extra duty officers in play so I usually like this card. There's also another copy of it in Sela's deck, so you can get some weird situations where you have two of these active at the same time.
↑ back to top Cloaking Device
In addition to our standard junk action, refreshing up to three ships and drawing two cards is a good play action, even with the action token cost. But the reaction is really interesting. It stays out as an Ongoing card, and anytime you deploy a ship without cloak (once per round, because it's a reaction), that ship gets the Cloak tag and you can discard a card to send an away team to any location, ignoring your opponent's ships. This is incredible value and makes Cloaking Device a critical card to get, especially for large fleet players without cloak (Koloth, and Sisko mid to late game). Plus, it scores for Military focus.
↑ back to top Lirpa
The Vulcan dueling weapon, Lirpa is an attack card with no action token cost. It works great for a player with a lot of Vulcan cards, because you can put a card on your deck to get a glory while also drawing cards for each Vulcan tag in play. You also get to dismiss an opponent's duty officer, while they draw a card, which is probably a good trade-off. Solid weapon.
↑ back to top Orb of Time
The impetus for the DS9 episode Trials and Tribble-ations, this time traveling Bajoran artifact is used by an elder Arne Darvin to try to stop Kirk from exposing him as a Klingon spy. The Orb has an Influence focus for points, as well as the Bajoran tag, both of which make it ideal for Sisko's deck. The play action doesn't cost an action token, and at the cost of taking an incident (time travel is perilous) you get to duplicate a Person, Cargo, or Ally card from your log. If that card self-logs, so will Orb of Time, so be careful duplicating Ally cards. You also get to recall another non-Time Travel tagged card from your staging area to your hand, which is simply amazing. You can use this in so many different ways and I suspect there are a lot of amazing combos waiting to be found with Orb of Time.
↑ back to top Tachyon Detection Grid
Immediately my mind went to TNG episode Redemption, where Picard forms a mini-fleet to prevent Romulans from sending cloaked ships to resupply weapons to the Duras sisters in their war for control over the Klingon Empire. The card requires no action token. You may dismiss a ship for two Research skills, which is a fine optional benefit but it's nice that you have the choice. You can force your opponent to log a Cloak from play, gaining you one glory and, if you have a Security tag in play, one Military skill. There's been lots of discussion on how this card makes Sela unplayable, but it should be noted that the player gets to decide which Cloak gets discarded. You can't use Cloaking Device to log a normally non-cloak ship since it expires at the end of your turn. I would say the best defense for Sela is to get this first or junk it, but assuming it's actively being sought by your opponent I'd simply invest in more non-cloak ships and try to find other ways to promote duty officers. I think any player with few cloak ships would be a fool not to find this one and use it. Plus, Influence focus points.
↑ back to top Sehlat — Promo Pack 1
Sehlat is a Vulcan native creature — a kind of Vulcan sabre-tooth bear — that also appears in Enterprise. I like the Creature tag and the fact that this card has no action costs. There are three different actions here, the first being finding a Vulcan and forcing your opponent to discard a Person card. Pretty useful. The second is a Vulcan free-play, which is also useful if you have one. Finally, you can promote a person with Vulcan from your hand or staging area. None of these actions by themselves are necessarily amazing, but having the flexibility of using the most relevant one without spending action tokens is quite good. You just have to have the Vulcan cards to make it work. This can work with Sela who has T'Pel in her Reserves. But all these base game captains will have to find one of the two Vulcan Person cards in the market deck.
↑ back to top Plasma Manifold
One of the most straightforward cargo cards is also one of the best, in my opinion. With the useful Engineer tag, you can free play and spend three Dilithium to gain an action token. Tremendous utility, considering how late game Dilithium can often be plentiful. You also get a Military Focus for endgame scoring.
↑ back to top Biobed
This is the only base-game cargo with a skill (one Research skill). Biobed has to be in your staging area to get the Research skill counted — it can't be beamed for it to count, per the rules for beamed cards. Biobed allows you the very common junk a market card action. You also get to free play an incident or find a Doctor card, all without action card costs. Finding a doctor usually allows you to deal with an incident as well, so there's good flexibility here. You also score for Research Focus.
↑ back to top Mek'Leth
I am far more familiar with the Bat'leth, as Worf uses them more often and they show up more on DS9 and Enterprise. But this card is pretty great, allowing you to discard a card to gain a military, and allowing you to see your opponent's hand. You can then discard an attack card and get a glory. This is a great offensive way to protect against cards like Tachyon Detection Grid, and the fact that you get to choose which card is discarded makes it all the better. No action cost either, though you'll have to have the card to discard.
↑ back to top Ferengi Wine
This cargo screams "Quark", where he benefits from other Ferengi in play, and Ferengi Wine also benefits from the Ferengi and Business tags that Quark has. The second action costs an action token, costs two Latinum to scan one Ally including the junk (which does include the entire junk pile), followed by an optional market junk. Alternatively, if you have five Influence Skills, you gain a Latinum for each Ferengi and Business tag, and gain a glory if you gained at least 3 Latinum. I think there are a lot of uses for an abundance of Dilithium, but it's nice to have cards that benefit specifically from a Latinum surplus.
↑ back to top Unstable Wormhole
There are too many examples of unstable wormholes to know for sure which one this is, but one thing's for sure: how is this cargo? How does one transport an unstable wormhole? I guess it could be small and isolated. Anyway, Unstable Wormhole has two actions. The free one allows you to look at the top two location or encounter cards and put them on the top or bottom of the deck, then draw a card. I like this for planning, but you probably want to be able to benefit from it before your opponent has a chance to take whatever you set up. The second action costs an action token, requires six Influence skill, and three Dilithium in order to draw the top location and control it immediately. This is awesome, and can sometimes lead to some amazing combos which may have been more difficult otherwise when you are controlling a location during a standard control phase. You do only get this ability once before you have to destroy the card, but don't do it literally.
↑ back to top Borg Spatial Trajector
Based on research this was used to send Picard and Soji to visit sad Riker and Troi on Nepenthe in Picard season one. This card has the Borg and Scientist tags, and two play actions. The first costs an action, requires four Research, and allows you to select three Persons from your hand or discard pile to beam them to a ship or put them on top of your deck to send an away team to a location. That ability is pretty darn useful, giving you away teams and setting you up to use those persons on the following turn or later if you can get some card draw. Then there's the second action, which I can't fully evaluate. It doesn't cost an action token, and it only applies if your captain is a Borg. Right there, this text on the card is useless at this point because we have no Borg captains yet. We probably will have to wait a while for this to take effect. I am really looking forward to seeing how this changes the game, but for now, I'll have to be satisfied with sending away teams to locations or beaming persons to ships.
↑ back to top ← Back to Compendium
