Introduction
Welcome to another preview of To Boldly Go and Second Contact, wave 2 of content for Star Trek Captain's Chair. As has been previously discussed at length over the last year since the announcement, To Boldly Go is a completely standalone box, meaning that you can play it without owning the core box. Second Contact on the other hand can be easily added to either the core box or To Boldly Go. Simply mix the new cards into each market and the locations to their appropriate decks. It is required you use the market of the captains you are playing with, so a box one captain playing a To Boldly Go Captain will be combining markets, and anyone from Second Contact will mix those cards into the standalone box of the Captain they're facing (or, if facing each other, at least one standalone market you choose). When you're mixing decks, simply remove the duplicate cards, replacing core box cards with their duplicate showing a dot or dagger symbol. For Locations, you'll also remove duplicates, which means more possible Starting locations will still be limited to a total of four, but any Advanced location could come up depending on how fast you get through the Location Deck. And the Encounter deck will also be larger, leading to more variation there as well.
I've played To Boldly Go as a standalone box quite a bit at this point. As compared to the base box, I think that it truly does ride the line between feeling similar to the core box and providing an unique experience. While there are cards that are replicated, the changes are specific enough to the six captains to make it feel like you have a different strategy to consider. Take for instance, the two Helmets in the cargo deck can be useful for any captain, but Rebner in particular likes to have Helmets to benefit his Duty Officers. Archer's deck benefits from his NX-01 trait-ed crew, but so can everyone else. Archer just can access them more easily with his ability to scan for that NX-01 trait. And Georgiou benefits from there being Klingon Trait cards in the deck, but there aren't so many that she's guaranteed to find them every time.
When I mixed in Second Contact, I found that it worked pretty well in either box. There's only a few market cards in each deck, but they can certainly have an impact on gameplay. Based on my conversations with playtesters and the designers, I think a lot of the testing focused on adding Second Contact into To Boldly Go, as kind of a "wave 2" approach. But I've specifically played with Second Contact in the core box and it presents some fun things to think about. For example, it doesn't matter which box you use, Moopsy is always going to present a benefit with a trade-off. And you'll be able to trigger the Lower Decker traits of Jennifer Sh'reyan and Nova Fleet regardless of which box you're using. I think the harder decision most players will have to make is which box to throw Second Contact into first. If I had to make a recommendation, I guess I'd suggest that it thematically fits more with To Boldly Go, but honestly, I'd start by waiting to mix it at all until you've gotten at least a few plays with each captain from To Boldly Go first. If you're desperate to try out Pike, Riker, and Freeman, then I think I do recommend To Boldly Go but it really, truly doesn't matter which core box you mix with.
Market Mixing Considerations
This is a bit of a repeat section from my To Boldly Go Person guide (as posted on BGG), but it's worth revisiting when we're considering mixing decks. In Imperium, the precursor to Star Trek Captain's Chair and the origin of the Imperium Engine (there are more thematic and mechanical variations planned), the market was not only a way to have shared cards that add to deck-building, but it was also and timer for the end of the game. Whenever the combined market deck ran out, that triggered the final round. Therefore, adding or removing cards from that market could greatly affect not only the length of time, but the balance of between nations who might do better in a longer or shorter game. Therefore, market mixing rules, variants, and suggested market decks became an important part of Imperium's online discussion.
Captain's Chair lacks that particular limitation, meaning that there's no need to remove particular cards from the market decks, However, that's going to necessarily lead to some problems. First, there's market bloat. The more sets of market cards you add together, the more random trait frequency will become. Additionally, you're going to have newer players reacting to more and more new cards and unusual combinations. Whether you mix boxes or not is generally up to you, but box-mixing had to be considered by the designers.
So if boxes are going to be mixed, what now? Should every card be brand new in the set? The obvious answer is, I think logically, no. We want to see the mechanisms from Phasers show up again, get the Incident return from Su'kal, and avoid games without the Enterprise-C. So why not make cards with similar abilities but different names to fill each stand-alone box? The answer goes back to mixing - I assume (for good reason, wink wink) that it will get super overwhelming the more and more sets are combined. And more than that, having two very similar cards in the deck will lead to situations where a player who manages to get both is more likely to have a game-breaking combination. By removing duplicates while combining but keeping copies of those cards in multiple stand-alone boxes, players will have less to learn when trying a new box and will be better served by a balanced market, all while preventing future market-mixers from being too overwhelmed.
So why mix boxes at all? One of the most obvious reasons to mix the three boxes is that it's just so thematically fun. One of the things I was most interested in when this game first came out was how it would be expanded. After all, we only had half of the Duras sisters in the common market. There's so many years of content and history from Star Trek, and it feels like we just scratched the surface. But that desire for thematic expansion has to be tempered by a mechanical understanding of each card, and the potential strength and weaknesses that can be harnessed by each captain. For sure, this is a game of opportunities, but understanding what can potentially arise in the market will be key to victories with a crowded market. The other thing that's really important to remember is that the scoring ceiling is going to go up with each additional added market, because of focus scoring. There's only so many points you can get from focus scoring, but adding in more unique cards with Research, Influence, and Military scoring is going to raise that threshold for high-track multiplier Captains. It's something to watch out for. At Gencon I witnessed Adam destroying David with the help of 11 (!) focus cards of one color in his deck. Consider this a warning!
That being said, I personally couldn't resist the desire to mix everything together after about fifteen plays of To Boldly Go, at least for my solo games. The markets are quite a bit more crowded, and are far less likely to run out (especially in solo play with Bots focusing on particular decks). Since the market cards are meant to be situationally useful, you'll always be able to find something that will benefit you. But it may be a lot more difficult to find the traits you need when you need them. Of course, there's a reasonably similar spread of some traits in each box, but let's take Augments for example. In the core set, the only Augment cards are Julian Bashir and the Ancient Gene Fragments encounter. There's a lot more Augments in To Boldly Go, but when you combine the boxes, that dilutes the amount in the market, meaning they won't come up as often. Or, if you're lucky, more will come up than before. It really starts to become a trait crapshoot for anything other than Human or Starfleet. And even then, you could get unlucky. It will make Junking card strategies more important, without doubt..
Another thing to be aware of is the effect that mixing boxes has on the junk. For each box being mixed outside the first, one card from each suit is put in the junk at game setup. The captains that have built in grab from junk effects or a salvage card in their directives will have an easier time with more choice seeded at game start without needing to strategically junk the first few turns. It also prevents other captains from "locking" a suit they really want to fish from the junk by putting a glory there at the end of their turn and refusing to buy it unless they are going to replace the glory on the next card flipped. Captains like Burnham are going to have an easier time gaining Ships with two junked Ships instead of none.
At the same time, there's a part of me that wants to tell you all that it doesn't really matter. It's really fun to see all the cards in one deck, to have the endless possibilities of the Star Trek universe all in one place. Well, everything we have for this game so far, that is.
Still, I think the greatest caution has to be urged against mixing boxes when introducing people to this game. It's hard enough to get a handle on the rules combined with needing to read every card on the first few plays. Yes, those of us crazy enough to have over 100 games so far have a general idea on what the market might present us. But you don't want to overwhelm someone new, so please, keep it simple for the first few plays.
As for promo cards? Do whatever you want with them. Personally, I'd throw them into the box that the wave came with, for instance, keep promo pack one with the core box and keep promo pack two with To Boldly Go. And then just add it all if you combine markets.
This conversation is going to get real crazy if (when) wave three comes out...
Here's a recap of my thoughts on when it may be better to mix, or not to mix.
When to Mix
You want the thematic experience of including everything Star Trek at the same time.
You've played each standalone box a lot (15+ times)
You want to see how certain cards interact with other cards outside their market (Bashir and The U.S.S. Reliant with the Augment trait, for example)
You don't care about having a perfectly balanced mechanical environment, focus scoring or trait distribution.
You want to have a more swing-y game with potential point thresholds and unique mechanic combinations.
You want to play a core box captain against a To Boldly Go Captain.
When not to Mix
Introducing the game to new players or yourself.
Looking for a more balanced competitive experience
You don't have a good feel for how often traits will show up
You feel like too many cards will leave you unable to make decisions as quickly, or plan for future turns or strategies.
You don't want to shuffle decks that are too big.
You're worried about runaway focus scoring.
← Back to Compendium
