Introduction
The Encounter deck is only eight cards (nine with the first promo pack) and the Incident deck only has six cards at the start of the game (though you can mix in the two promo pack Incidents and choose six of the eight to use). There's not a whole lot to say about some of these, but for completeness sake I think it's good to put out my strategies regarding these two decks.
↑ back to top Encounter Deck
The Encounter deck is full of super powerful cards that most captains can get some use out of. Obviously, certain captains are going to favor various encounters over others, but it is rare, especially when using a directive that lets you draw two encounters and pick one, placing the other on the bottom of the Encounter deck, that you won't have a choice of something useful. These cards all have decent points, actions, reactions, and traits, making them a helpful part of any deck. The biggest problem of course will be incorporating them into your current strategies, because if you get an encounter in turn 8-10 you won't have that many opportunities to use it before it gets logged. That's why pushing for an early encounter can really change your game. Here are my (very general) thoughts on the encounter deck.
↑ back to top Omega Particle
Perfection, as Seven of Nine would say. Omega Particle is a free play action gaining you three Dilithium and three Latinum. The rest of the card can be ignored for now, but when Borg enter the game, you'll gain a glory for each Borg trait in play. If you gain five or more glory, you'll destroy the card, so maybe tamp it down on those Borgs. It scores for Research Focus. I don't always grab this one if I don't need resource generation and the other card is better (assuming I'm choosing between two). I think a Borg captain might change that. It scores for Research Focus.
↑ back to top Ancient Gene Fragments
I really liked the setup to this TNG episode (and clearly did some Discovery writers because they revisited the concepts in Discovery season five), though I hoped for a bigger impact such a discovery would have had on the Star Trek universe. Basically, after cobbling together gene fragments, the Enterprise, some Romulans, Klingons, and Cardassians discover that there was a progenitor species that seeded the quadrant with DNA, which is the canon reason everybody sort of has the same basic biology and can cross-reproduce.
Anyway, this card has the very rare (for this box) Augment trait as well as Anomaly. There's two action token play actions here. The first allows you to draw a card for each controlled location with at least one away team you have, and you gain an action if you have a Scientist trait in play. I think this is easily the better of the two actions, provided you've got the away teams and Scientist trait to support it. Alternatively, you can use the second action to scan two of any of the four market decks, and draw a card if you have a Scientist (which can be the card you just got if you gained it to the top of your deck). Great card, great flexibility. The only captain I've avoided getting it for was Sela, who doesn't really have great access to either putting a lot of away teams on controlled planets or access to a Scientist. It scores for Military Focus, which was a little surprising to me at first because I would have assumed Research. It does make sense though as everyone thought that it would create a weapon when combined.
↑ back to top Boltzmann Brain
The only core box card to be a direct Strange New Worlds reference, Boltzmann Brain is the spontaneously generated consciousness that interacted with Dr. M'Benga in season one. It's a free-play action that allows for a card draw and returning one incident. It also has the Telepath and Doctor traits, as well as six points. I usually grab this one when it pops up because even if you don't have the Incident, there's still a card draw so it'll never be completely useless in your hand.
↑ back to top Sha Ka Ree
My dad maintains that Star Trek V, the Final Frontier, is his least favorite movie of all of them. He thought them trying to find God was silly. And maybe it was, but Sha Ka Ree isn't silly. It has the Vulcan, Attack, Ongoing, and Transcendent traits. It has a play action that costs an action token to deploy, and allows you to beam one of your ships there (you very likely won't be getting it back). Your opponent takes two Incidents when you do, because you gave God a starship and that wasn't good. It also has special text making it a location for all purposes. Because it's a location for all purposes, you can't beam it to a ship, because what would a Starship want with God? (Not my joke, can't remember which forum post it originated from, but it was hilarious and should be repeated). It scores seven points.
EDIT: it was pointed out to me that you can use Strange New Worlds on this card and the beamed ship counts as the necessary ship. That means you're not only using this encounter to get another encounter, but it's much easier to do so and you don't have to bother dismissing a ship because you beamed one there in the first place. Super convenient.
↑ back to top Guardian of Forever
Introduced in TOS and with art from Discovery, the Guardian of Forever gets the Anomaly, Ongoing, Time Travel, and Transcendent traits. The play action is free, and gains you a Research and Influence as well as deploying the card. It's an ongoing hand-size increase, with an ability to scan cards in the Junk. Depending on how early you get this in the game, it can be a game-changer for momentum. When you decide you're done with it, you can recall a non-time travel card from your staging area, then take an Incident to gain an action token before it self-logs. The only way I wouldn't take this card is if it's the final turn, the other card gives more points, and I don't think I could benefit from the skill track increase or the extra action in order to get more points than the other encounter would provide me.
↑ back to top Wesley Crusher — Promo Pack 1
Found in Promo pack one, Wesley Crusher appears to have his civilian garb from TNG season seven. He has the Pilot, Human, Starfleet, and Transcendent traits, all of which are completely appropriate. His play action costs an action token and allows you to enlist a Reserve or Development card, then draw a card (could be the one you just got), then self-log Wesley.
Now, I'm going to be clear, I almost NEVER use Wesley this way. Maybe if I get him on the second to last or last turn of the game, but otherwise, he's a duty officer. That's because he has two wild skills and a Passive ability that allows you to use the Activations and Reactions of any Person in your staging area. And it says "may", so you won't be inadvertently logging or dismissing anyone you don't want to. This has been key to so many of my victories, and I nearly always grab Wesley. He also gets six points.
↑ back to top Iconian Gateway
First seen in TNG and recurring in DS9, The Iconians created transporter tech that allowed them to travel between planets without ships, instantaneously covering more than 70,000 light years of distance. Therefore, the main play action allows you to send up to three away teams to the same location ignoring ships. You also get one military per Imperial trait in play besides Iconian Gateway. It scores for Influence Focus.
↑ back to top V'Ger
From Star Trek The Motion Picture, the Synthetic traited V'ger is pretty straightforward. For a free action, you can log up to two cards from your hand or discard pile. Pretty sweet, especially for any Android strategy that benefits from maximum logging. It scores nine points.
↑ back to top Koala
Why is he smiling? What does he know? The Koala is one of the sillier jokes in Star Trek Lower Decks. An all-knowing God-like Koala that characters see whenever they transcend to a higher state. Besides eight points, the Koala has a Wildcard trait making it great for beaming and using it primarily for mission completion or some other requirement that involves counting traits. It can't be otherwise played so if you don't need it beamed, find a way to log it and move along. I take that back, don't log it. Please beam it somewhere. Use that Wildcard trait to the fullest.
↑ back to top Incident Deck
The Incident deck is full of cards with negative points (two each) and represent different crisis a captain can face. They're generic enough to work with any captain but specific to common conflict tropes in the Star Trek canon. Each of the six core box Incident Deck cards also appears in at least one Captain's deck, so you see at least a couple duplicated. There's also two promo Incidents that I have a lot more to talk about than the others. All Incidents cost an action token to use their play actions (no free play Incidents…yet. And I'd guess probably not. It takes time to deal with a calamity.). And if you have the promos, you simply shuffle the eight, randomly pick six, and return two to the box unseen.
↑ back to top Red Alert
Also found in Picard and Shran's decks, I usually hear Will Riker holding out that "R" in Red Alert a little longer than you'd expect when I play this card. You can return it to the Incident Pile if you put a card on top of your deck. Then, you may promote a Person card from your staging area to Duty Officer, which is actually kind of cool because you can use a card's play action and promote it on the same turn. Not that bad of an Incident actually.
↑ back to top Energy Drain
The engineer Incident, it costs you two Dilithium to return Energy Drain. You can get the Action token you spent back if you have an Engineer in play, which is a nice bonus for sure, so long as they're in play. If you happen to have a mission or ability that lets you free play an Incident, it's naturally even better. It's also in Sela and Koloth's decks.
↑ back to top Trade Embargo
Shran's second Incident, Trade Embargo forces you to spend a Latinum to return it to the Incident Pile, which isn't too steep. You also get to refresh a ship, which is actually a better benefit than the action token and Latinum cost depending on which ship it is (Enterprise C? Scimitar? Voth Research Vessel?).
↑ back to top Hostile Contact
Also found in Koloth's deck, Hostile Contact has two actions. The first lets you discard a card to return the incident, and if that discarded card has a Military Skill or Focus, you gain two Dilithium. The second action only requires you to have a Communication trait in play, and you still gain two Dilithium. Provided you have those cards there, this is also not much of a problem, and worst case it'll cost you a card with no benefit to return it.
↑ back to top Political Crisis
Also found in Sisko's deck, Political Crisis is very similar to Hostile Contact in that you discard a card to return it, gaining a Latinum if the discarded card has an Influence Skill or Focus. Alternatively if you have an Ambassador in play you can simply gain the Latinum and return the card.
↑ back to top Subspace Phenomenon
Also Burnham's Incident Pile card, Subspace Phenomenon also has a discard a card to return action, and if there's a research Skill or Focus you draw two cards and discard one of them. The second action lets you also return the incident and draw and discard two cards as long as you have a Time Travel trait in play. Thankfully, there's one of these in each market deck and the Guardian of Forever encounter.
↑ back to top Whale Probe Incursion — Promo Pack 1
Representing the Whale Probe that threatened Earth in Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home, this promo Incident has the Alien, Attack, and Surprise traits. It has an Attack play action, which requires you to recall a deployed ship, if you are able to do so, meaning that if you don't have a deployed ship you can still play the card. Then, you force your opponent to recall a deployed ship, and if you have a creature in play, you can return this Incident. This is my least favorite to get because you have to have a creature trait (or Wildcard, obviously) to return it via its play action. There's also some additional text for solo, saying that if the bot plays this Incident, it attacks, requiring the human player to recall a ship. But I love the flavor and it's a fun reason to intentionally grab some creatures.
↑ back to top Flight Training Accident — Promo Pack 1
When Nova Squadron tries a Kolvoord Starburst, you're left to lecture cadets about their commitment to scientific, historical, or personal truth. Once again, you have two options. The first requires you to Find and log a Ship to return this card, gaining an action if you have one or more Person on duty. The second allows you to return the Incident if you have a Pilot in-play, gaining one glory. I really like this one because there's usually a way to benefit from it, and return it. It's a little less punishing than Whale Probe Incursion.
There is a Surprise trait, which gains the bot a glory, then they resolve the top card of their deck, followed by returning the Incident. That can lead to some truly impressive bot turns, but the challenge is worth including Flight Training Accident in possible incidents.
↑ back to top ← Back to Compendium
