Introduction
There are 10 starting locations and 10 advanced locations in ST:CC as of March 2025. While all advanced locations have the potential to be used in a given game, only a maximum of four starting locations will be seen each game, meaning that starting strategies will vary for each captain deck based on the starting locations that show up. I was playing a game the other day and got a group of starting locations with only three total skills on two of the four starting locations, meaning that it was very difficult to use these locations to gain on my captain's tracks with the Utilize directive. Likewise, different starting locations may inform strategy due to their resupply abilities, control text, or activation operations. Advanced locations on the other hand usually have greater points and more dynamic abilities, leading to greater conflict between players for control.
I've done my best to evaluate each card based on its standalone value, but also considering various captains and their individual strategies and benefits they might be able to gain pursuing particular locations. As always, you will have to make the situational decisions in the heat of battle, because there will always be a card that seems weak right until it becomes exactly what you need for your strategy.
One final reminder: when someone takes control of a location, the opposing player gets glory for every token they have on that location. That doesn't always have an effect on which location to go for, but it can make you think twice about fighting hard for a location, especially if the primary value is limited to the points gained. To get 4 points for a location that gave your opponent two points isn't much of a benefit, especially if they're simultaneously spread out controlling better locations. Something to keep in mind.
↑ back to top Starting Locations
Ancient Relay Station
I love this starting location because it opens up some of the best late-game strategies early for a captain. You can grab Deanna Troi early and get a major advantage dealing with Incidents. You can pull the Scimitar and start controlling planets quicker. You can deal with Burnham's inert Dilithium problem faster too, provided you meet the other requirements. And there's the bigger problem with this location. You often are taking it when it's pretty early and you can't actually get the best development necessary. Not to mention, losing a card and an action token for the round is fairly limiting. And for all of that, it gives you no points itself. I still think it's usually worth it, if only to guarantee your opponent doesn't. Riker's Play action can also hit this multiple times, so I would say this is an absolute win for playing as Picard.
↑ back to top Betazed
It's interesting to me that Betazoid gets its own tag while other species are sometimes given the simple Alien tag. Hopefully that means we'll get Lon Suder at some point. Betazed's control ability reflects the wealth of the planet, but it's not the reason it's valuable to us ST:CC players. It's those three influence skills, which make it possible to shoot up the Influence track. I rather like games where Betazed is in play because it allowed me to directly focus on Utilize in a way I might ignore otherwise.
↑ back to top Dozaria
The military equivalent to Betazed, Dozaria has a control benefit of Dilithium, but I'm more interested in the two military tags. That's less than Betazed's three, meaning that it's just plain worse. But if you don't benefit at all from an influence track strategy, it's worth going for. I think Dilithium tends to be plentiful enough during the game that the three provided won't make or break most players, but if you intend to use Utilize for advancing on tracks it might be worth the extra boost. Also, with that Breen tag, I'm wondering how many more Breen we'll see since we didn't see many of them prior to Discovery season five.
↑ back to top Indri VIII
I gotta say I'm confused as to the genetic tie-in here. Klingons destroy the atmosphere of the planet preventing others from getting genetic materials, making it an anomaly? And that gains the player an action and five points? I'd probably have done something with the toxic atmosphere and preventing players from sending away teams, but you work with what you've got. And what we've got is a solid starting location. Two different skills is fine, especially if you're trying to move up both tracks during the game. Gaining an action is great, though you do have to also have the requisite number of cards to support four actions, which is sometimes difficult early game. Five points is the most valuable starting location from a points perspective.
↑ back to top Amargosa Observatory
From Star Trek Generations, the ill-fated observatory gets blown up when the Amargosa sun is destroyed by Soran. I appreciate the thematic Special text that requires players to warp all of their ships to one other location, which has been clarified by the designers to include a location that there is already one ship at (it warps away and comes back). The card draw is a nice bonus. But there's also the benefit of gaining a person, usually worth some points, and a glory if you can pull a scientist or engineer. I also really enjoy that reaction text because it not only gains players glory via encounters but also helps log cards, including from the discard pile (my favorite place to log a card from). Honestly, the three points might be overvaluing this card.
↑ back to top Risa
Risa's one influence skill isn't great, but everything else is solid. Taking three person cards out of your deck, hand, or discard is good if you're trying to thin your deck, and you can still recall those person cards using the activation ability in order to recall the card to your hand for use later, all while gaining Latinum. The 4 points is good for a starting location, which makes it an easy decision. I don't find myself beaming many cards to Risa after I've controlled it, mostly because I'll be wanting to use those cards as I draw them from my deck. Still a solid choice.
↑ back to top Tulgana IV
I don't like the lack of skills, situational Control text, or the puny points this location provides. However, the four tags are situationally useful, and the Activation text is useful. Being able to send an away team each turn is great, especially if you already have plenty of Latinum. Getting some card draw from the deck or discard pile at the mere cost of a Cargo is also pretty useful, albeit, situationally. This is probably the location I'd pass on the most, of these starting locations.
Errata: As it has been stated in the comments, I may have valued this location too low compared to many of the playtesters. Part of that is that the majority of my plays are solo, and there is a real benefit to using this location when players have a large deck or discard pile, because it gives players opportunities to find a card in the discard, which is fantastic for a starting location. And the cost of 1 Latinum is, as I stated above, pretty great for getting an away team out. There was certainly enough advocacy in the comments that I felt like it was necessary to point out my blind spot!
↑ back to top Corvan II
Corvan II discards the top card of your deck in order to gain some Dilithium. The deck-churn is helpful, but it doesn't increase your hand and it's a fairly minor resupply. For a captain with a lot of cards sharing their tags, this could be useful as a Dilithium engine, but it's not like you can count on more than one per turn. I think this one is also pretty weak.
↑ back to top Archer IV
Archer IV isn't much better than Corvan. In fact, it might be worse. While there is a card draw, you still have to discard a card, which only gives you a little agency as a benefit. Likewise, there's limited skill benefits here, and no tags. I don't have much more to say about this one, except that it's probably my least favorite starting location.
↑ back to top Delta Vega
I don't love Delta Vega either, but at least there's no discarding any cards here. Gaining Dilithium for each person in your hand presents no downsides, unless you have no person cards in your hand. If nothing else, it's a guarantee of some Dilithium occasionally. I'm missing the thematic connection to Gary Mitchell, other than the idea that the more people you have the more they'll be able to mine Dilithium from the planet. But yeah, I think this one is better than the other two resupply planets.
↑ back to top Advanced Locations
Ba'ku
The regenerative planet from Star Trek Insurrection serves a couple purposes. First, you can get a lot of person cards out of your discard pile and hand if you time it right, and you can return them, once per activation, to your hand. It does cost a Dilithium which can be bothersome for Burnham, but otherwise it's relatively cheap to have repeated access. Though, it is worse than Risa, where at least you get a Latinum for your crew. The real benefit though is gaining an action for beaming your Duty Officer to Ba'ku. This is especially useful if you already were planning on switching out your Duty Officer anyway. The points on this are nice but probably don't amount to a ton, as you will often be recalling persons from Ba'ku for additional use, provided you control it early enough in the game.
↑ back to top Regula I
This is the space station in Star Trek Wrath of Khan where David and Carol Marcus were working on the Genesis Device. As such it has appropriately 2 research skills and focuses on scientist cards. The control ability will be situational, as you may not have a scientist you're aware of in your deck or you might not have enough Dilithium to bother with the scan. The reaction is good, again, if you have scientist cards, but you've got to remember to actually use it and exhaust the card. The Anomaly endgame score is good for decks like Sisko and Burnham who both have access to at least one, but it could be less desirable for a military focused faction like Shran or Koloth who don't care about research skills.
↑ back to top Derna
As someone who hasn't seen DS9, Derna's was a fun mix of tags for me to analyze. The Romulans get a tag for using the fourth moon of Bajor as a medical camp/plasma torpedo launch site during the Dominion War. If those don't help you, the benefit of scanning for a weapon or doctor card and drawing a card isn't bad. The dual activation abilities are extremely thematic, as you can beam weapons to the moon for endgame points, or you can discard weapons from your hand to return an Incident, thus avoiding any potential issues with the Romulans. Not being able to recall those weapons is annoying, but in return it's 2 endgame points per weapon card beamed to Derna. That makes it worth it, situationally.
↑ back to top Verex III
An Enterprise-Era slave auction planet, Verex III gives you a point for each Shady card you have at the end of the game, plus a glory when you control it. There's also a Latinum engine sustained by logging person cards. I'm not sold on Verex III as a prime choice, because most of the time I don't find myself needing a ton of Latinum and not having other methods to get it. But, if you've been doubling down on Shady cards either for a mission, to prevent your opponent from getting them, or just coincidentally, it might have some value based on those endgame points. But otherwise there are stronger candidates to fight over.
↑ back to top Memory Alpha
Starfleet's master database has a great control action, allowing you to thin your deck but still access a card from your log for its play operation. Using a card like Riker, you could repeat this multiple times which makes it very valuable in the right circumstances. Logging a card (including the one you log when you take control) gives you a glory, but you can only use it once per turn because it's a reaction and not a passive ability. The five points in addition make Memory Alpha worth getting in most circumstances.
↑ back to top Freecloud
Looking up some lore on this planet, I found that it was in the Beta quadrant, which surprised me because I kind of forgot that the Romulan and Klingon Empires were located there. Primarily featured in Star Trek Picard, the planet's unaligned and business nature make it an interesting control option in ST:CC. You can gain a Business card when you control, which is nice. And it has a small Latinum engine costing only one discard when used. But that second activation? Spending 2 Latinum to find ANY card is amazing. Even if it's just to find someone who will guarantee more card-draw, this is an excellent ability. Combined with five points it's worth seeking almost every time.
↑ back to top Solum
A high point scoring planet and it only costs you an incident. Solum is the home to a dead civilization featured in Star Trek Prodigy, and while there's not much to say about it, it's usually going to be hotly contested. A 10 point swing is a lot. There's a BGG thread already discussing that it has some downsides, but I do think it's not worth rolling over and just giving your opponent. Even if it's not going to go your way, doing what you can to make your opponent work for it will help blunt the hit of a 10 point swing.
↑ back to top Xahea
A dilithium-rich planet, it makes sense that there would be a dilithium resupply that is very solid, especially if you can control it early on. Likewise the Reaction ability is amazing, as it allows for the most efficient use of Utilize, as both a dilithium generator and skills generator in the same play of the card. Obviously you have to have a person to put on the deck, but it's the kind of card you can build and break strategies on.
↑ back to top Deep Space K-7
I wanted a creature tag for K-7 due to the tribbles that inhabited the station for approximately 17.9 years, but alas, this appears to be pre-infestation. This location is pretty simple because it's an extra action generator, provided you have a card that will work. I think that most of the time this is worth getting, though there are certainly times where I'd consider letting my opponent have it, especially if I had minimal influence track progress.
↑ back to top Kelvas Docks
It's not typical for me to highlight the benefit of a location for its tags, but this card certainly has that going for it. With the limited number of Dominion and Cardassian cards in the base game, the importance of Starbase tags to Sisko, and the benefit of having a permanent Engineer tag for the Energy Drain Incident, it's not worth ignoring simply on that basis. The Activation is okay, as 3 Dilithium can be a lot, but free playing a ship is fantastic. Refreshing isn't bad either, and with the Enterprise-C patch could lead to some extended turns with non-time travel abilities. It's not my favorite of these advanced locations but is situationally very useful, especially for Sisko.
↑ back to top ← Back to Compendium
