Introduction
For all of these market cards, it is worth continually pointing out that benefits are circumstantial. A card can be valuable for its tags, Table operations, points multipliers, and more. There are some cards that do stand out above the rest, and I find myself pursuing most games regardless of my chosen captain. I will try to give some context to the particular captains who benefit from particular cards more than others, but it might need to be something I delve into more in the future. I decided not to tier-list these because that's not really the point of market cards like this. They'll be useful for your captain or strategy, or they might not be, and while I have some favorites, anything can be useful or a dud depending on how the chips fall. There are 25 person cards in the base game of ST:CC, and without any more delay, here are my thoughts on them.
↑ back to top Talok
Talok is an Enterprise-era Romulan under deep-cover in Vulcan society, which accounts for his myriad tags. His action ability is a good way to have a bit of agency choosing a person, and it forces your opponent to get stuck with an incident. I generally dislike cards that give incidents to your opponent in solo play, but there's almost no downside in two-player games unless it would literally cause the burn. But what I really like using Talok for is as a duty officer to increase hand size, especially if you have a card that gives you a second duty officer position. His Imperial ability makes him useful for both Koloth and Sela, or if you have any of the 4 other common Imperial cards in the base game (Ambassador Kamarag, Bird of Prey, Iconian Gateway, or K'Tinga Battlecruiser).
↑ back to top Admiral Necheyev
Picard's late-series frenemy, the Admiral does have command over the fleet as evidenced by her activation that lets you warp any number of ships for a single dilithium. Pretty versatile. I appreciate her resupply too, which is especially good for Sisko if he's pulled some Wildcard tagged Developments. But my favorite element of this card is its free play of a directive from hand or discard pile. The discard pile is fantastic, because it could mean Utilize in rapid succession or any number of other positive combinations. I also love the 3 free beaming because it can be slow-going beaming cards to your ships without something like this.
↑ back to top Rom
Quark's little brother packs a punch. He can choose between 3 cargo cards then free play it from the discard pile at the cost of 2 latinum. As long as you have a Latinum-gaining engine, that's a pretty fantastic use for them. But his reaction's great too, allowing you to draw a card from your Discard pile or deck when you gain a Latinum. I imagine this would be a great card for Sisko's deck to pair with Quark as duty officer, but it would work equally well to make him Duty Officer while pulling Latinum from a location like Risa each turn. Rom's extremely flexible.
↑ back to top Ambassador Kamarag
I really like Kamarag's play ability, as paying two Dilithium to scan for a card isn't a bad trade, especially if you have a lot of Dilithium. It's also a nice military boost. I don't know that I particularly care about his Reaction text most of the time, but if you are facing an opponent that is controlling a lot of locations and you're simultaneously struggling with getting Incidents out of your deck, this isn't a bad Duty officer at all. The Klingon Ambassador in The Voyage Home, this is one of those rare named characters that gets his name from non-canon source, at least according to my limited research.
↑ back to top Admiral Jarok
Jarok (or is it "Sublieutenant Setal"?) is a card that offers a great trade. Give your opponent a card (which may or may not be useful their following turn) and enlist a development. That's a game-breaker in line with Ancient Relay Station. And he doesn't get logged after, which is incredible. The table operations aren't bad, as gaining glory and logging cards from the discard pile is good, as is having additional cards on duty, but the attack restriction is kind of a bummer. I think I'd end up using Jarok for his Play ability more often, but overall an excellent card.
↑ back to top Zefram Cochrane
I absolutely love finding and getting the father of warp travel. Cochrane is a consistent 3 card draw at the cost of an action token. Making sure you have one or two cards in your deck that give more action tokens makes this a no-brainer, as you'll have extra cards for beaming to ships, extra opportunities for combos, and you'll move through your deck quicker. His activation is also great, as it just requires you to spend 3 Dilithium and having a ship in your hand. It is unfortunate he's logged instead of dismissed, but then he's available in your log for reusing with cards like the Orb of Time or Memory Alpha.
↑ back to top Lursa
My biggest surprise at seeing Lursa in the person deck is the realization that she cannot be a captain with her sister B'Etor in the weirdest duel-captain deck that could theoretically exist in the future. As for this card itself, Lursa has the typical Klingon and Shady tags you'd expect from a Klingon adversary, and a military focus that makes her more valuable to captains favoring that skill track. Her activation is great because it provides three distinct benefits. Gaining a Latinum is good. Beaming Lursa to a ship and getting an away team on that ship's location is great, so long as that ship has a location. And for the cost of a Dilithium and incident she can nab a ship, which is also pretty darn good.
↑ back to top Harry Mudd
Harry Mudd has all the good villain tags. He also has an ability that is usually pretty good. Forcing an opponent to log a person from their hand or discard pile is a great way to mess with their synergies and slow down their game, and alternatively making them take an incident isn't bad either. The auto-promote is likewise useful, and the recall ability is almost always helpful and gives you a benefit if you're already trying to get another duty officer in play. For solo, this card is an auto-incident for the bot (as explained in the solo rulebook on page 10), which is usually good but considering the bot doesn't care how many incidents it takes if the burn happens, I am always cautious about giving it incidents.
↑ back to top Phlox
I haven't seen Enterprise yet (it's on the list) but I'm kind of surprised that Phlox doesn't have a Starfleet tag as he was ostensibly part of Starfleet's organization. But onto his card, which has a common Doctor ability to deal with incidents. But if you have six research, you can return any incidents in your hand and one from your discard pile while beaming Phlox to a ship, which is a fantastic way to kill a lot of birds with one stone. His reaction requires Dilithium and sending away teams for one research gain, which is not super efficient and isn't my favorite, but if you know that's coming up and you don't have use for his other ability, it can prove useful.
↑ back to top Sakonna
Sakonna can use Latinum to gain influence and military, and can find a Ferengi card, which meshes well with Sisko. She also has a resupply that can get you an extra action, which is great if you have a weapon-heavy deck like Shran or Koloth and are already at four on the military track. Drawing a card and scanning for a weapon is great, especially to further the other abilities on this card. But the Badlands location is something of a mystery until more material is released — it could be in a captain deck, a starting location, or an advanced location, each with very different implications for how often Sakonna's second ability comes into play.
↑ back to top Lenara Kahn
I get the feeling that when this game is done, there's going to be ever so slightly more DS9 characters than other series, because there's always more people coming in and out on a station and less standalone episodes with characters of the week. Kahn had a few appearances and is a solid way to gain on the research track, which synergizes with her research focus scoring. She allows for scanning for an Anomaly, which is great for decks where there's only one, for now. Her duty officer activation is a latinum for glory trade for every anomaly in play, which is good once she's gotten a few, or good for Burnham or Sisko right off the bat.
↑ back to top Joret Dal
I love the episode Lower Decks, and I still kind of wish they'd done the show as a serious, hour-long live action series in the tone of the original. Joret Dal comes in at the end of the episode as our reason for sending off Ensign Sito to her end, which still bothers me and Beckett Mariner. He has a very efficient ability, which allows him to send an Away Team and gain a glory with a promotion to duty officer. I love any card that increases hand size, so this reaction is great by me. This card isn't flashy, but it gets the job done efficiently and helps thin the deck a bit.
↑ back to top Mirok
Mirok is one of a few cards with minor errors and errata. Its text is the same as the Cargo Deck's Tachyon Detection Grid, and if you want to play with the card like that until the reprint or next printing nobody is stopping you. The correct future text is as follows: Attack Play: You may log a Cloak from your hand or from play to force your opponent to log a Ship from their discard pile. If they do, gain 1 Glory. If they cannot, they take an incident. You may promote this card to Duty Officer. The Reaction is correct, allowing a card draw when Cargo is put into play. No action token is required for the action, either the original or the misprint. You have to actually have a card with Cloak, and you have to discard it — a pretty hefty cost unless you're Sela. But it will make your opponent do the same. Timed correctly, this could be devastating to Picard, Shran, or Burnham, and you get a Glory out of the deal.
↑ back to top B-4
Star Trek Nemesis has a special place in my heart because I was a kid when it came out and I didn't hate it for its flaws. B-4 lets you gain cargo from the junk, probably because he himself is junked parts. You could also gain a synthetic at the cost of gaining an incident, which is great for Picard's endgame scoring or Bruce Maddox's ability. But his Attack activation is awesome, allowing you to log a card, make your opponent take an incident and gaining Dilithium.
↑ back to top Tevrin Krit
Tevrin Krit originates from one of the Short Treks minisodes during the first couple seasons of Discovery. As a bounty hunter, his action costs 2 Dilithium but gains him a scan 3 of Persons, which is a great spread of choices. Beaming them (because you're delivering a bounty) gets you paid a Latinum. The resupply is pretty great if you have cargo and need Latinum too. Getting this card recently and using the Emerald Chain ally to free play this business card is one combo worth watching for.
↑ back to top Captain Dorg
The first in a trio of Klingon sibling-antagonists on Lower Decks, Dorg is a fairly powerful card no matter what you're using him for. As an action, he's a great way to get a ship or glory (and if you discard Holographic Drone Ship, both). He also has 2 reactions, one to get an extra action token, and another to remove opponent away teams. That's some great versatility and he's a top card, for sure.
↑ back to top Moriarty
Despite a pretty hefty five-Research threshold, Moriarty packs a punch in allowing for scans of Holograms or Engineers with zero action token cost. I anticipate that this will be especially useful if expansion decks are mixed together, as will most scan abilities. That being said, two Dilithium isn't always cheap. This card definitely is stronger in multiplayer due to the discard element. In a Hologram/Synthetic heavy deck, his reaction is also quite beneficial, though I wish it was passive and not the once-per-turn Reaction (unless refreshed). Can't beat four tags though.
↑ back to top Laas
A rare Changeling, I appreciate that this card doesn't cost an action token, but it is a bit complex. At the cost of putting a Person card in the staging area, it allows duplication of a person or cargo ability. This is usually straightforward, and if there's an action token cost on the targeted duplicated card you don't play it, making this very powerful. You also don't deploy Laas if there are any ongoing abilities on the cargo. But if the Person or Cargo gets logged at the end of their action, Laas does too. The Activation is tremendous, because of the Find ability at the low cost of a Dilithium. There's a lot of versatility here, with some rules complexity, but it's worth getting.
↑ back to top Riva
I never really liked Loud as a Whisper that much as an episode, but the idea of a telepathic mediator was pretty fascinating. Riva has an influence skill and some valuable tags (especially for the Political Crisis and Hostile Contact Incidents). His Play action is free, and provides card draw and potential glory, which is almost universally helpful (unless you just have zero attacks). His Reaction is more circumstantial, especially because you may not have any cards in your deck that share traits with Riva. I usually prefer him for his Play action but I do like to pick him up when I see him.
↑ back to top Peanut Hamper
My wife absolutely hates the Peanut Hamper episodes of Lower Decks, but I appreciate how it subverts the narrative of every Starfleet officer being dedicated to the ideals of self-sacrifice and heroism. I've been using this card a lot lately for the Dilithium gain play action, which also allows for a duty officer promotion. With Shran in particular it helps to be able to scan Cargo, and that Resupply action speeds the game along while gaining you points. As if that weren't enough, playing Shady cards or being attacked while Peanut Hamper is duty officer returns her to the top of your deck, so you can gain more Dilithium without her clogging up your deck or discard.
↑ back to top Admiral Pressman
Admiral Terry Quinn himself graces ST:CC with a wonderfully thematic card. His free Play action allows an attack to get free played, saving you an action token. He also can promote a duty officer from hand or discard pile if you don't have one already. His resupply action supports a strong security force, and his activation allows you to dismiss a card with cloak in play to gain 3 glory and log him, just like Picard logged him right back to Starfleet HQ for developing phasing cloak. Though, I kind of admit, he sort of had a point about being technologically hamstrung by the Treaty of Algernon. I saw some interesting head-canon that the Romulans gave up the ability to develop AI, which is a big fear of the Romulans in Season one of Picard, in order to prevent Starfleet from developing cloak. Sometimes I wish the writers filled in these blanks better. Anyway, Admiral Pressman. I like his card.
↑ back to top Laris
Speaking of Picard season one, Laris enters the game with a free play action allowing her to gain Research or Military for one Dilithium. She also allows for card draw if you have an Android in play, making her pretty helpful (and thematically so) for Picard's deck. Her Resupply duplication could be awesome but I personally have never had her in play at the same time I've had another resupply. I could imagine Shran could do well with this. Her Activation is also useful, allowing a refresh of deployed cards or controlled locations at a 2 Dilithium or 1 Latinum cost. This could be awesome, depending on how you use it, but it gives a player more options, which are so great in this game.
↑ back to top Lwaxana Troi
Once I made Lwaxana the duty officer for Picard, which didn't really do anything for me thematically but it made me laugh. Anyway, Mrs. Troi has a good set of tags (that go nicely with Riva's Reaction) and a free action allowing for a Captain or duty officer to get a refresh, though Picard would prefer riding a horse with his personal saddle for a refresh. Her other ability allows for influence gain for Latinum, reminding us that she is both effective and luxurious as an ambassador. Her Reaction is good (draw a card when a person is put into play) but requires six influence which may be unobtainable for some captains.
↑ back to top Bruce Maddox
All person cards are circumstantial, and Bruce is one of the more extreme examples in my opinion. He has a science skill, four tags including Engineer and Scientist, and a free play action. He can find and free play a Synthetic, which is great for anyone with a Synthetic in their deck and fantastic for Picard who has Data in his reserve (so long as he isn't out yet). Maddox's reaction is good as well, allowing for both glory and card draw when Androids go into play. If I'm Picard, I'm salivating for this card. Anyone else would have to get B-4, Moriarty, or Peanut Hamper to have a chance of benefiting. If you're doing well in research, he scores for his Research Focus, which again will usually benefit Picard and Burnham.
↑ back to top Su'Kal
From Star Trek Discovery, Su'Kal is a Kelpien, and I'll leave it at that in case you were worried about spoilers for Discovery. The card can't be played, which means it can't be put in the staging area. It can however be beamed or promoted to duty officer. There's some good Dilithium generation, especially if you're taking a lot of incidents. But the real advantage here is the Special scoring allowing for the return of two incidents at the end of the game. It takes the pressure off wasting action tokens to return incidents. As one of two Kelpiens in the base game, Su'Kal is scannable by Saru which means it may be hard for other players to actually get him. But if given the chance, he's a decent card as he represents a potential four point swing.
↑ back to top ← Back to Compendium
