Introduction
When I was doing my initial strategy guides, I included the first promo pack in my analysis of the game. I thought it would be better to preview the promo pack by itself in its own BGG strategy post. Here's the six new cards in Promo Pack Two:
Starbase 80 (Advanced Location)
Notable Appearances: LDS 5x5: Starbase 80?! & 5x10: The New Next Generation
"Starbase 80 is the worst" according to literally everyone except the people who actually work there. It's outdated, dangerous, and unorganized. And it's awesome we got it as a promo. From the junk bin of Starfleet to the DS9 of the multiverse, its rise is meteoric. Let's just hope no meteors hit it or it might fall apart.
Starbase 80's Control operation lets you gain a Person/Cargo/Ship from the junk (makes sense). There's an Action-token Activation where you can beam a person to Starbase 80 to junk an Incident from your hand or discard pile and junk another card. As a Reaction, when you gain a card, you can log a card beamed to Starbase 80 to include the junk. There's also a passive that lets you take Incidents from the junk. Put together, this card is one of the best ways to consistently get cards out of the junk, which will be helpful with the new rules on combining boxes. Plus, the idea that Starfleet's junk all goes to Starbase 80 is right on-theme. And if you're trying to force a burn on the opponent, junking your incidents are so much more punchy than merely returning them.
↑ Back to top Frank Hollander (Cargo)
Notable Appearance: TNG 6x8: A Fistful of Datas
"You sit tight, boy. I'll have you home in time for supper." When a Holodeck malfunction changes the bandits of Deadwood into Data-clones, Worf gets to "enthusiastically" engage in a standoff. It will not improve his long-term father-son relationship with Alexander. Or Troi for that matter.
Frank gets the Android, Anomaly, and Hologram traits. He has a free play action which requires you to log a Cargo from your hand, discard, or in play to gain a Glory, and you can free play a Hologram or an Incident. This is pretty great, especially if you have some Cargo you don't care about logging, and it will make Moriarty even more unbalanced (I couldn't resist). And hey, if there is ever a card in the future rewarding you for collecting all the Brent Spiners, you now have one in the cargo deck too (I would not put this past David).
↑ Back to top Golden Statue of O'Brien (Cargo)
Notable Appearance: LDS 1x3: Temporal Edict
"Perhaps the most important person in Starfleet history, Chief Miles O'Brien," is recognized in the far future with this beautiful statute.
This cargo has a free play action that finds an Engineer and deploys. It then lets you recall a beamed card when you log an Engineer, and scores you one point at endgame for every Engineer in your log. Pretty simple, and with the limited number of Engineer traits it's probably not constantly useful, but it's certainly nice to get those extra endgame points when you can.
↑ Back to top U.S.S. Cabot (Ship)
Notable Appearance: ST 2x2: The Trouble with Edward
We get another ship to join the Enterprise B in the promo space dock, the U.S.S. Cabot from the Short Treks episode "The Problem with Edward." I decided to give it a watch when I first wrote up this paragraph because it's pretty, well, short. The Cabot gets overrun with Tribbles when a conceited science officer genetically manipulates them to propagate rapidly to be used as meat for a starving planet. To be honest, his captain wasn't great either. I can only imagine how badly she would have bungled having somebody like Barclay on her crew.
As a Science vessel, it gets a Research skill and Scientist trait. This ship's play action deploys it and allows you to scan for a Creature if you Take an Incident. On Resupply, you can draw a card for each creature in play (which would work great with Cleveland Booker). It has the normal warp/beam Activations, and a passive that triggers when you exhaust the Cabot , and then you can either free play Tribbles or draw Tribbles from your discard pile. Now, that's obviously only going to matter when you have Tribbles, and right now Tribbles is only in the core box. Whether you throw this ship in with To Boldly Go or not, it's another option for the ship deck.
↑ Back to top Drones of Cube 90182 (Ally)
Notable Appearance: LDS 2x9: wej duj
At first, I had thought this was the holographic cube from Boimler's training mission, which would make sense because all Borg cubes look the same. Rather, this is an end credits joke from Lower Decks, where the whole episode centers around Vulcan, Klingon, and Pakled lower deck crews, and the episode ends with the hum of a Borg cube as their lower decks regenerate.
This Ally has a free play action where it is beamed to a ship, then that ship is refreshed or you draw a card, or you can do both for one Dilithium. There's a support action, where you can spend a Dilithium to draw a card and gain two Research after you put a Borg card in play, which feels great if you can find some good Borg to trigger it. There's also a Borg-y Support operation that I'm sure will be relevant by 2367 at the latest (or maybe as early as April 4th, 2063).
↑ Back to top Subspace Rhapsody (Incident)
Notable Appearance: SNW 2x9: Subspace Rhapsody
When David teased on the Captain's Chair Discord that he would make us sing, I naturally just assumed that Kirk would get a custom Directive called "Row Row Row Your Boat." That was not the case. Instead, you're encountering a probability field...
This Incident requires you to put a Directive in your Staging Area (without triggering its play operation) to return Subspace Rhapsody. Of course, if you're willing to sing the text of that card's first play operation, you can refresh your duty officer or captain. I'm not sure if that's more awkward playing multiplayer or solo. David wanted to make the singing mandatory, but Paul Grogan threatened to tear up his copy of the card, so cooler heads prevailed.
↑ Back to top
