Introduction
While the Person and Cargo decks are a bit more circumstantially beneficial, the Ship deck is almost always beneficial in some way or form because no matter the text on the cards, ships are nearly always necessary for location control. There are 13 ships in the ship deck at present (14 if you count the U.S.S. Enterprise-B promo, which is included below). All ships score two points unless otherwise indicated. With that out of the way, let's jump in.
↑ back to top U.S.S. Enterprise-C
Okay, most controversial ship to start this whole thing off. The Enterprise-C is a Starfleet ship with the Time Travel and Ambassador tags. I wouldn't have necessarily given it Ambassador thematically — though it is, in fact, an Ambassador class starship. I like that tag for the Political Crisis Incident if nothing else. It currently has a Play action that costs an action token and deploys the ship and allows for a card beam without a discard. However, this will be patched in future printings to read "Deploy this ship. Up to twice: beam a card here OR warp this ship. Exhaust this ship." The reason for this is the Enterprise-C's Activation abilities. Besides the typical warp and beam Activations, there's a third awesome one. You can dismiss the Enterprise-C and discard a card to gain a Glory, an Action token, and recall a non-time travel card from your staging area. If the Enterprise-C didn't enter play exhausted, this would be incredible because you could find combinations with a thinned deck that could lead to infinite combinations. Instead, we get a still incredible card that can't pop off every single turn. And there are ways to refresh ships so it's not impossible to find a pretty compelling loop that's not quite infinite. Oh, and it scores for Research focus, making it a valuable card for many captains points-wise.
↑ back to top U.S.S. Pasteur
Anything that comes from Picard's alternate future shouldn't be showing up in a game where 32nd Century Starfleet cadets are examining history, because it's not part of history. Same reason it's weird and upsetting that Captain Liam Shaw knows about the anomaly in the Devron system. That's what logical, canon-loving me would say. But I really like this card and love the medical ship design of the Pasteur, so I'll overrule my own objection. The Pasteur has the Starfleet tag in addition to Communication and Doctor, which I really like not just for the thematic tie-in but for the Hostile Contact Incident. It has the standard Dilithium/warp and Discard/beam activations, and scores for Research Focus. There are two play actions costing an action token. The first allows you to deploy the ship and free play a Communication or Doctor tag. The second action costs two Dilithium to scan for a Communication, Doctor, Engineer, or Scientist. I love this, because there's so much utility here. I'd probably use this for Engineer most often because of how that interacts with cards like Forced Singularity and Plasma Manifold, but the flexibility is what makes this great. The only downside is that scanning for a card doesn't allow you to deploy the Pasteur on the same turn, but that's a minor issue. Excellent ship.
↑ back to top U.S.S. Reliant
Is that the Botany Bay? Upside down Bozeman? Nope, it's the Reliant from Star Trek Wrath of Khan, and it's… entirely boring, unless you have five influence in which case it's very solid. The Reliant has a standard play action for deploying and warping the ship, and the two standard warp and beam activations. Where it's unique is the free play action requiring five influence. Your opponent can't have more than one ship deployed, but if that's the case you'll deploy this ship and choose two of the three: Send an Away Team to a location, draw a card, or discard an Augment to gain two glory. For now, the only Augment is Bashir in Sisko's developments so you'll be defaulting to drawing a card and sending an away team to a location. The best part about this is the combined two tokens on a planet (the ship and away team) for free. If you're not intending to get five influence, it's probably worth junking or passing on the Reliant.
↑ back to top U.S.S. Enterprise-B — Promo Pack 1
The promo card in the base game comes from Star Trek Generations and has a lovely view of the Nexus ribbon. The card text gives players an excuse for a mid-week game, as its play action deploys the Enterprise-B, gains a Glory, and, if it's a Tuesday, lets you send an away team to a location. If you don't get that joke, you can watch the first ten minutes of the movie for it to make sense, and enjoy Alan Ruck (Cameron from Ferris Bueller's Day Off) as the Captain of the Enterprise-B. If it's not a Tuesday, the Enterprise-B still has the standard activations for warping and beaming, in addition to a doozy of a third one. This Activation lets you log a person from your hand or Staging Area to draw a card and gain an action token. This may make it my favorite ship in the market, because it's rare that I'll have no person cards I'm willing to log (I may even want to) and I'll get to extend my turn. I honestly don't see much downside, unless you truly have no Person cards you wish to depart with.
↑ back to top Son'a Battlecruiser
The Son'a have a pretty standard Activation suite (warp/beam) along with the classic villain Shady, Attack, and Dominion tags. There are two Attack Play actions, both costing a token and deploying the ship. The first lets you steal one Dilithium from your opponent. If you have six Military skill you can instead steal two Dilithium and force your opponent to discard a card. I think this is a pretty solid attack, especially if you can pull it off early. Side note: I was only familiar with the Son'a from Star Trek Insurrection, so I was kind of surprised when I saw that Dominion tag. Turns out that DS9 ended its run a year after Insurrection came out, and they were able to reference the Son'a in the final season of DS9, which makes the heavy lifting they did to get Worf with the Enterprise-E crew all that more impressive.
↑ back to top Kazon Raider
The Kazon don't get their own unique tag (at least not yet) but they do get Shady and Attack. They have an attack play action that deploys the ship, forces your opponent to discard a card, and if you discard as well nets you a Latinum. In addition to the standard warp/beam activations, there's also a reaction that triggers when you gain a card to the top of your deck. Don't make the mistake I did: this doesn't trigger when you put a card on top of your deck, like with Red Alert or enlisting. This is when you gain a card from the market and decide to gain it to the top of your deck instead of to your discard pile. When this reaction is activated, you can spend a Latinum to draw a card and refresh Kazon Raider, so don't use the first two Activations until you're sure you won't need this Reaction to pop-off. The Kazon Raider scores for Influence Focus.
↑ back to top K't'inga Battlecruiser
The only Klingon ship in the Ship deck, the K't'inga class Battlecruiser has a military skill and an Imperial tag, as well as a military focus. Like the ships found in Koloth's deck, it has a deploy ability that allows it to send an away team to a location, in addition to the standard warp/discard activations. A straightforward choice for anyone needing to add Military skill or just for the consistent away team placement.
↑ back to top Bird-of-Prey
The original series version of the Romulan Bird-of-Prey comes with Imperial, Romulan, Attack, and Cloak tags. There's also an Influence skill, which makes it a great choice for Sisko and Picard, who can use the extra Influence skill. The table operations here are a little different. Yes, there's the standard "discard a card to beam a card" activation. The deploy play action costs an Action token and lets you discard a card to send an away team to any location, ignoring opponent ships. This is a great way to undercut opponent control and force them to overcommit to neutral locations. As a side perk, if you discard an Imperial card you get a Glory. To warp the Bird-of-Prey, you have to also spend an Activation token, but you may also spend one Dilithium to force your opponent to recall a ship. I appreciate the thematic difficulty of the early cloaked Romulan ships costing a lot of action tokens but having powerful effects.
↑ back to top Voth Research Vessel
The Voth hail from a fascinating episode of Star Trek Voyager, wherein a super advanced Reptilian species discovers via a scientist that they share DNA fragments with the humans aboard Voyager and thus have a shared origin. In an effort to cover up this distant origin theory, the Reptilians almost end Voyager's trip then and there, but in an extremely thinly veiled metaphor, Voyager is allowed to continue so long as the scientist disavows his theory. Sad. Anyway, this ship has the Alien and Anomaly tags, likely because of the odd connection between humans and the Voth. It also gets a Research tag for the scientist operating the ship. The play action costs an action token and deploys and warps the ship at the cost of a discarded card. There are three activations, including the standard beam activation and a free warp activation. The final activation costs an action token and allows you to dismiss a Human person card beamed to the Voth Research Vessel to take the top Encounter, then you log Voth Research Vessel. A wonderfully thematic way to take an Encounter card, random though it may be.
↑ back to top D'Kyr Cruiser
It has the Vulcan and Scientist tags, and the standard warp and beam activations. There are two play actions both with action token costs. The first deploys and warps the D'Kyr Cruiser, and you may discard a card for one research. The second action requires five military, which then allows for deploy, warp and sending an away team to the D'Kyr's location. Especially for higher Military captains like Sisko and Koloth, I am very much in favor of getting this ship if it shows up. It provides two-thirds of the tokens needed for securing a location, and isn't a terribly high skill threshold.
↑ back to top Pakled Freighter
Ship good. Ship Business and Pakled. Ship go and person come and go normal way. Ship can deploy for token cost. You gain junk Cargo, and if Cargo weapon/anomaly, you gain Military. Ship very good, with broken thing in junk most of all. Person who write promise not to do this for every Pakled Card. [Edit: Person may not be saying truth because Designer promise Pakled Planet great Influence in game].
↑ back to top Xindi-Reptilian Battleship
I promise that Enterprise is on my watchlist, I'm just not there yet. The Xindi get a tag so Turczi and Buckle must have some more cards, maybe even a captain in mind for this tag. There are two play actions that cost an action token. The first deploys the ship and allows for a gain of a cargo, allowing you to beam it to this ship and gain a glory if that cargo is a weapon. This is pretty great, especially for Shran and his Secure Andoria's Borders mission. The second action also deploys the ship and gets you a glory for each time travel tag in play, up to three. There's also a Resupply action that allows for a card draw for every two Anomaly tags in play for up to four cards, which would normally mean drawing up to two cards, but Sisko could potentially draw more with his Orb of the Emissary and future Wildcard/Anomaly cards. This ship has the standard warp/beam activations, and scores for Military focus.
↑ back to top Borg Probe
This ship has the Borg tag, naturally. It has a free play action to deploy and warp the ship, but you can optionally spend an action token and one Dilithium to gain a person and log that card. That seems kind of silly (it's just a point, unless the card has a focus or market glory on it), except that if you have a Borg captain you can assimilate that card instead. What does that mean? What does that do? I don't know because I'm not on the inside. No special treatment here. I'm looking forward to find out with the rest of you. The activations are kind of unique, where you can warp the ship for free or beam a card from your hand or discard pile without discarding a card from your hand. Perfect for completing certain missions.
↑ back to top Holographic Drone Ship
I also looked up some clips of this one in action, because the Aenar, Weapon, Hologram, and Romulan tags were too intriguing as a group to not learn about. I think it's clever how they used drones to keep the canon that the Federation didn't know what the Romulans looked like, as that was well established in TOS episode Balance of Terror. I've never been a fan of prequels for beloved IPs because there's too much that can be ignored, but I really do feel like I'm at just the right point to watch Enterprise. Anyway, Holographic Drone Ship is getting a nerf per the FAQ. The first Play operation is changing from "duplicate a play operation of a ship..." to "duplicate a play operation of a non-time travel ship..." According to the designers, "This patch almost never matters, but without it there is an infinite loop achievable via the USS Bozeman." Trust me, I was not clever enough to discover it on my own before the patch. That free play operation also requires seven Research, but allows you to draw a card and duplicate a play operation of a (now non-time travel) ship from the market or any player's fleet area, which is both super thematic and powerful. There's a second free play action which allows you to discard a Telepath to deploy and warp the ship, which seems limiting until you realize that the first action can copy a ship in order to get deployed, so you're not limited to just having a Telepath to get this ship out. Once deployed, you can warp the Holographic Drone Ship or dismiss it to gain two glory, but nothing is going to get beamed here unless the play operation you duplicated allowed it. It also scores for an Influence Focus.
↑ back to top My favorites include the Enterprise-B and C, the Voth Research Vessel, the Pakled Freighter, and the Xindi-Reptilian Battleship, but everything has its place and value. At the end of the day, ships are valuable by themselves just for controlling locations and preventing your opponents from setting down Away Teams willy-nilly. So get out there and secure/blockade some locations.
← Back to Compendium
