Introduction
As we get ready ourselves for an influx of 150% more captains than we currently have for this game (6 to 15), I thought I'd work on a few auxiliary guides to hold us over until the new stuff arrives. Ideally, I'd be working on these guides in tandem with the other ones, but believe it or not these take quite a bit of time! Anyway, as the vast majority of my plays of this game are solo, I thought that I'd do a short guide to how to approach solo play. This will be a simple look at Cadet and Bot general strategies, as well as a discussion about Conspiracy, mostly for the benefit of people who haven't tried the solo mode yet.
So show your friends these guides a few days before you play. If they don't read them, that's not your fault when you crush them (which is probably a paraphrase of a Romulan proverb). Anyway, let's get the hardest question about solo out of the way first. Is Star Trek Captain's Chair a different game when played solo? My answer is a resounding no. Mostly. Depending on which solo we're talking about.
Solo Cadet Practice Mode
ST:CC has two solo modes. The first is the Solo Cadet Practice mode. This mode requires no opponent upkeep for solo players. You simply take your turns, and see what score you can get. The Stardate cards for the Solo Cadet Practice mode operate differently than the regular game, ensuring that you will only play for 11 turns. At the end of 11 turns, the game will end, no matter how much Glory you've taken.
There's some rule changes you have to keep track of. Glory comes from the supply, not Stardate cards, which can be a pain to remember since the regular game is the opposite. During cleanup, you get to wipe any card from the market (removing any tokens on it) and place a Glory from the Stardate card on a card in the market (one Dilithium instead if you're Burnham). There's also a rule that any cards that refer to your opponent refer to a virtual opponent who has "one of everything." This can lead to some odd results, but also means you'll never have to worry about more than three tokens for controlling neutral locations. Making your opponent take an Incident gets you a Glory as well. In final scoring, you're trying to score at least 70, with any score over 100 considered Proficient and any score over 120 to be outstanding.
I really like Cadet mode for testing decks without having to worry about opponents. However, I'll be completely honest and admit that I've only used cadet mode 5-6 times. When I use Cadet Mode, it's almost exclusively for my first play of a new deck, to learn the cards in the deck without the added mental load of running the Bot. However, as I've played more and more, I've found the Bots incredibly easy to manage, and my games against a Bot often go several turns less than cadet mode (shorter play time is appealing). Another issue with cadet mode is the "one of everything" rule, which can make particularly effective attacks less valuable, and some cards that exclusively attack your opponent outright useless. Wanted to gain two Glory from removing opponent away teams? You'll only get one Glory, and since there's no actual away teams there you're no closer to controlling that neutral location. Still, it's great to have options, and I think that Cadet mode remains an ideal way to learn a new captain deck as well as practicing maxing out your score in the absence of significant competition for locations and Glory.
↑ back to top Starfleet Command Training Program
Alternatively, you can use a separate solo rulebook to battle it out against any other captain in the box, using a chart that tells the solo opponent what to do based on the traits and suits on the card it draws. There are some nuances to using the Bot, but once you remember a few rules (in conjunction with the reminders on the back of the solo rulebook) everything runs very smoothly.
Setup is the same for you as normal, but for the Bot you pick a captain and a difficulty level, taking their associated deck and captain board, using the basic side. Because the Bot doesn't make decisions on what to enlist, you'll shuffle the Bot's Development deck, then shuffle the Reserve deck and place it on top of the Development deck to form what will be referred to as the Bot's Supplement deck. Statuses are returned to the box. Incident deck cards are put in the Incident deck as normal, and discarded cards are also discarded for the Bot. The Bot's available cards are shuffled to make its facedown deck, and if you have any Deployed and/or Controlled location cards, those will be placed on top of the deck (in random order if multiple). The Bot also gets their captain's printed number of away teams.
Understanding Values
I think one of the harder learning curves to running the Bot is understanding values, which is why the rulebook addresses it first. The Bot will often be asked to choose the most or least valuable card, and that's based on how the Bot scores in the endgame. Printed values are easy to understand, as are focus multipliers (the current value on the Bot's respective track). Endgame operations are always going to score the Bot five points, so get used to just knowing that when you see a location with an endgame operation. Likewise Glory adds to the value of a card, but other resources do not. If there's a tie, the number of total resource tokens break the tie, and if still tied go left to right in the market/neutral zone.
Resolving Cards
The next important concept is how to resolve a card for the Bot. Each captain has a pair of solo cards that tell you exactly what to do instead of the printed text on the cards. This gives the solo Bots some interesting flavor while also simplifying the types of actions each player has to worry about. There are two cards: Traits and Suits (with and without duty officers). Whenever you draw a card for the Bot to resolve, you start with the Traits card and see if any of the Bot's desired traits match the card being resolved. If not, you go down to the matching Suit and resolve that operation. The Suit resolutions are different depending on whether the Bot has a duty officer or not, and will change whenever the Bot dismisses or promotes a duty officer. Every card has a resolution of some kind, so if you find yourself stuck, you made a mistake somewhere previously. And only resolve one operation — if you resolve a trait, don't then go and resolve the suit too.
Shran's Bot Cards for reference
Running the Bot Turn
During the game itself, you get to be the first player every game, which comes with its strategic pros and cons. The Bot gets to ignore the Resupply step, simplifying things for you. During its Control step, if the Bot has one or more secured location, it takes the most valuable one, and you get Glory for any tokens that are dismissed. Then you resolve the location as a card, which will mean checking the traits first, then the location suit. During the Action step, you'll draw as many cards as the Starfleet card indicates, then resolve them one by one. Then in Cleanup, you'll resolve any Stardate cards in the Bot's staging area, discard the cards the Bot resolved this turn, place a Glory on the card in the market least valuable to you, and end the Bot turn.
The game ends as normal, except in the case of the Burn the Bot automatically wins. Then, the Bot scores normally (including for Glory and tokens in the neutral zone) except that they score five points for each Endgame operation owned (in play or not), printed points and focus icons as indicated on its specialty tracks, and a point for every two Dilithium or Latinum in their supply. Special operations do affect the Bot if there's an asterisk in the endgame value. You win if you have more points, but a tie or worse results in a loss.
The Bot interacts with the neutral zone by deploying ships and away teams. When the Bot Explores , it warps to the location with the fewest total tokens. When the Bot Engages , it warps to a location where you have the most tokens. In case of any ties, start with the most valuable location, and if still tied go left to right. For away teams, the Bot is limited to locations where it has more or the same number of ships that you do. The Bot will send away teams to the location with the most Bot tokens. If the Bot has no away teams left, then the Bot removes an away team from the location with the fewest tokens.
↑ back to top Basic Strategies
Adjusting from Multiplayer
When you're playing the Bot, there are a few additional considerations that you should probably consider in order to have a really great game. Consider The Burn. While I don't see this ending happening all that often right now in Multiplayer gameplay, it's a valid strategy if you know your opponent has a lot of Incidents to overwhelm them with a few more and cause the Burn, thus guaranteeing victory. But that won't work against the Bot. You could have sent every Incident into the Bot deck and if they trigger The Burn, the game ends and you lose. Incident management becomes much more critical in a solo game, especially if your captain takes a lot of Incidents as part of their whole deal.
There's also attacking strategies that just don't work in solo. The notorious Moriarty onslaught that Picard can perform against his opponents to make them discard cards doesn't do anything to the Bot. Therefore, you want to be aware of the cards that are more valuable in solo play and consider your strategies in terms of their effectiveness against the Bot. This means more things that gain you points, slow the Bot down, and speed up the end of the game.
↑ back to top Game Tempo
Tempo matters a lot in solo play. In a multiplayer game, there are 30 total Glory placed on the Stardate cards during the course of the game. Each solo Stardate card set has varying amounts of Glory to consider:
Ensign: 31 Glory · Lieutenant: 30 Glory · Commander: 30 Glory · Captain: 29 Glory · Admiral: 27 Glory
Commander Level Stardate Cards as an example
This doesn't necessarily mean that Ensign games will go longer or Admiral games are always shorter, but there is an obvious difference. Against a Bot, there's no way of knowing for sure, and often the Bot can take a lot of Glory in a single turn (Shran with no duty officer pulling three cargo cards in a row can lead to six Glory, for example). You have to make better use of your turns compared to the Bot on average, and that often means pushing for endgame quicker than you might in a multiplayer game.
Sometimes you are given the choice whether to take extra Glory (you may take a Glory). That would seem like a no-brainer, but let me suggest that when there are two Glory left on a Stardate card, you might consider holding off. The Bot resolves a number of cards based on the Stardate cards (2-5 cards). If going to a new Stardate card would cause the Bot to draw an additional card, it might be worth it not to take that additional Glory, and to give the Bot one less card draw than they would have had. That is always a case-by-case decision, but in a multiplayer game this isn't a consideration at all.
↑ back to top The Neutral Zone Game
One of the core strategies I recommend understanding is what the Bot will do in the Neutral Zone. Once you understand Engage versus Explore, you can use that to your advantage. Leaving a neutral zone planet worth zero VP available to explore means the Bot will go there. Once they have some away teams there, they'll prefer to send more. Avoid giving them control of locations with endgame scoring or traits matching their Trait resolution cards whenever possible.
You can trick the Bot into situations where you can use your attacks to remove away teams, but also into situations where they're focusing really hard on trying to take a not particularly beneficial location. You can even take an aggressive opponent like Sela, who will engage you more often, and start by sending your ships to a location you don't particularly want so she will engage you there and send away teams. Then when they take it, you've freed up space for a location you're more interested in. Forcing a full stalemate is also an option, because you can park your ships on a location and gain a ton of Glory when the Bot grabs it.
↑ back to top The Market Game
There is a bit of an art to deciding where to place Glory in the market against the Bot. While any Bot could theoretically take any card, it's best not to place Glory on a market card that they either wouldn't prefer, or are just less likely to take. For example, PicardBot loves Ally cards. Why put a Glory on an Ally card? That's just asking for him to take an extra point. Likewise, stacking Glory on a card will make it naturally more valuable, meaning the Bot has an increased chance of going for that card.
You also want to consider that cards with Focus scoring that match the Bot's preferred tracks aren't a good option for placing Glory on either. The Bot's resolution cards are going to favor that focus scoring, meaning it's more likely those cards get taken, and then give the Bot a ton of points at endgame. Consider this as you're looking for market cards as well. You might not particularly need that military focus scoring card, but if Sisko or Rebner is your opponent, I'd scoop that up now so you avoid giving them their max point values for those cards.
You can even put Glory on a card you don't want to encourage the Bot to take it, thus cycling the deck and giving you opportunities to get something you actually want. Now, all of this is subject to the whims of the Bot resolutions, but there's still some logic in it and some of the best players and playtesters I know think about these things (special thanks to Stormburns).
So is a game of ST:CC completely different when playing a Bot versus a person? No, it's really not — the vast majority of your decision space is similar, and your personal goals while playing aren't going to change. But the operation and strategy of each Bot is going to behave a bit differently than a person, and you can develop strategies that are specifically poignant against the Bot. You just need to be prepared for the slight differences. I love this game for solo, and think that if you haven't given it a shot yet, you should try it.
↑ back to top Conspiracy
Conspiracy starts shuffled into the Bot's Available cards at the beginning of the game, meaning that it can come out as early as turn one. It has a Surprise operation, which means the Bot will always resolve the exact text on the bottom of the card, ignoring the Shady and Starfleet traits. When the Bot resolves Conspiracy, you, the human player, have to choose between taking an Incident and putting Conspiracy at the bottom of your draw deck, or giving the Bot two Glory and discarding the top card of the Bot's Supplement deck.
If you take the Incident immediately and put the card on the bottom of your draw deck, you've given the Bot nothing. They don't get the Glory, and they don't get to rush through their Supplement deck. Reasonable for early in the game. At that point you'll have to worry about Conspiracy when it comes up, and you'll have a Play operation (that doesn't cost an action) requiring you to discard a person card from your hand to discard Conspiracy and draw another card. That's annoying, but not impossible to deal with. Its special ability prevents Conspiracy from being beamed or discarded except when you use its Play action to discard it. That means no discarding Conspiracy at the end of your turn to get rid of it. What it doesn't say is "no logging," which means that you can use any ability that logs a card in your hand to send Conspiracy to your log, thus rendering it inert. The second special text indicates that you destroy Conspiracy before scoring if the Bot has it (anywhere) or if you have it logged. So, best case scenario would be to put Conspiracy at the bottom of your deck the first time it comes out, make sure you find something that gives you the ability to log a card, and do so when you have a chance.
But what if Conspiracy doesn't get played by the Bot for a little while? What if you're on Stardate card three or four and it happens to come up for the first time there? Is it worth it to just give the Bot a couple Glory and help it move through its Supplement deck? I am hard pressed to think of a time where this is the right choice, unless you know, for a fact, that you will be unlikely to be able to log Conspiracy before the end of the game. Taking it gives you negative six points between the card and the Incident, which is not easy to deal with if you've got limited turns left. But I would advise against giving the Bot Glory and speed anytime before Stardate card four.
There have been games (not many) that I have played with Conspiracy where it never comes up, usually because the Bot logs it early on. Sometimes it has a huge impact, and sometimes it's not a factor at all. Would I recommend using it? Certainly if you're one of those players who crushes it constantly at Admiral difficulty, sure, why not? But I don't actually think it has an enormous impact on gameplay. It simply slows down your ability to take actions and cycle your deck, and in the wrong circumstances it could be pretty devastating. I would say Burnham is the best equipped to deal with Conspiracy early on due to how many person cards she has in her starting deck. But the captains who are least equipped have limited logging options from their deck and person cards they can't afford to discard.
↑ back to top Video Playthroughs
Official solo tutorials by Paul Grogan (Gaming Rules!):
▶
Solo Tutorial — Part 1
Official · Gaming Rules!
▶
Solo Training Mode — Part 2
Official · Gaming Rules!
▶
Burnham Solo Playthrough
Solo · Gaming Rules!
← Back to Compendium
