Introduction
There are 26 Person cards in To Boldly Go's market. 9 are repeats, and 17 are new.
Common Person Deck
Here is a list of the repeats from the core box Person Deck:
Admiral Jarok
Harry Mudd
Lursa
Phlox (With Added NX-01 Trait)
Riva
Rom
Su'kal
Talok
Tevrin Krit
I really like this list of repeats and am going to highlight some of the choices I'm a big fan of. Including Phlox was a given considering Archer's deck relies on this market to gather his crew. I think having Su'kal in any market is great for Incident control (along with benefiting Saru in Georgiou's deck). Riva and Rom are great for traits (Engineer, Communication, and Ambassador help with returning Incidents). Jarok and Talok are good for both Vulcan and Romulan traits and nearly universally helpful table operations. I think these Person cards will be good to have available for players who are playing exclusively with To Boldly Go.
New Person Cards
Ambassador Gral
Notable Episodes: ENT 4x12: Babel One & 4x13: United
Before the Federation, there were constant conflicts between the Vulcans, Tellarites, and Andorians. Season four of Enterprise explored those early relationships via conflict between Ambassador Gral and Shran on board the NX-01 Enterprise.
There don't seem to be a lot of downsides to having Ambassador Gral on your crew. His actions are both free-play, and finding a card is nearly always useful, even if it's limited to Influence skill/focus. His attack targets your opponent's Vulcans or Andorians (watch out Soval and Shran) for a Glory, and is a free promotion for Gral or another Tellarite. Even if you don't have another Tellarite, he can self-promote, and his reaction lets you give Incidents to your opponent instead of returning them. I anticipate that in multiplayer games, we might be able to see a forced-Burn meta develop around the Tellarites.
↑ back to top Ash Tyler
Notable Episodes: DIS 1x5: Choose Your Pain , 1x14: The War Without, The War Within , & 2x3: Point of Light
Ash (Voq) Tyler is the spy who didn't know himself. Planted with the memories of a human Starfleet Lieutenant, he finds himself acting to protect his cover in contrast to his conscious desires. Rejected by the Federation, then the Klingons, he becomes a Section 31 agent.
Ash (Voq) Tyler has a vast array of traits representing his duality as Klingon, Human, Starfleet, Spy, and lethal weapon (Attack). His free play actions represent this well, as you can only use them conditionally depending on whether he's surrounded by more Klingons or Starfleet. With more Starfleet, he finds a Military Skill/Focus card. He's a bit more dynamic around Klingons, as he can dismiss an opponent Duty Officer for two Glory and self-promote. If you have more than eight Glory, he increases your hand size by two which is a nice variation on the "spies increase hand size" archetype. He'll be really interesting to use in Military heavy decks like Georgiou or Riker, and I imagine Koloth wouldn't mind a Klingon warrior spy to give Darvin some company.
↑ back to top Commander Tysess
Notable Episodes: PRO 2x1-2: Into the Breach , 2x6: Impostor Syndrome , & 2x15-16: Ascension
Commander Tysess is Vice-Admiral Janeway's Andorian first officer on board the U.S.S. Dauntless and U.S.S. Voyager-A. He helped with the search for Captain Chakotay and the Protostar, and was critical support during the fight to protect Solum from Ascensia.
Tysess has a free-play action, with a twist. He lets you find any Person and promote them to Duty Officer, then if you want to spend an action token you can use that promoted person's play operation, and Tysess can be beamed to a ship for Dilithium. That's great, but I think his Reaction is probably even better, since you can trigger a control operation of a controlled location after you send an Away Team. It's pretty clear that reactivating controlled locations is the archetype for first officers, as this is very similar to Riker's play action, only now everyone gets to use it as a common card.
↑ back to top Degra
Notable Episodes: ENT 3x14: Strategem , 3x20: The Forgotten , & 3x22: The Council
The Xindi are five (formerly six) different species, and Degra is a Xindi-Primate Scientist who developed the Xindi Weapon which threatened to destroy Earth (under false intelligence from interdimensional sphere builders). After actually meeting Captain Archer, he starts to question his devotion to destroying the Human race.
Degra's play action lets you scan for an Anomaly or Xindi at the cost of taking an Incident. You can then spend a Dilithium to draw two cards, which is great because you can immediately use whatever you've drawn. In my few plays, I've enjoyed using this to get a Xindi ship, then play it the same round if possible. Degra's Activation requires five Research and gets you the top encounter at the cost of four Dilithium and dismissing a Weapon, at which point he is logged. Great to have some more one-off Encounter-gaining cards, and it'll be interesting to see if players tend to use him to scan or to get an Encounter as soon as possible.
↑ back to top Hoshi Sato
Notable Episodes: ENT 1x3: Fight or Flight , 3x6: Exile , & 4x11: Observer Effect
Hoshi Sato was a University Professor in Brazil when Captain Archer recruited her to join the NX-01 Enterprise as communications officer. Hoshi's ability to translate alien languages is nothing short of magic, though, the universal translator is similarly magical.
Hoshi has a free play action that lets her find a card with Research skill/focus. Her second action requires five Research and lets you pick a species to scan for when you discard a card with Research skill/focus. Depending on your missions, the choice of your desired card will vary, but that offers a ton of flexibility for any captain. Her Activation also costs an action token, and lets you draw a card for each Alien you have in play and you can find a card in your reserve deck and put it in your staging area without triggering any play operations. This can always be helpful, but is particularly useful with Archer. But I'll wait to delve into that during Archer's strategy guide.
↑ back to top Jackabog
Notable Episodes: LD 1x10: No Small Parts
Jackabog is the boss of the ship. He is strong. He destroyed a little Starfleet ship. He is Shady Pakled.
Jackabog use shiny things to get broken ships, and when Jackabog strong he gets very good card. Anyone can use Jackabog with helmets! With Helmet, Jackabog gets cards, which is good for Rebner, because he doesn't get many cards. But every captain likes cards! Jackabog is a good person card, but he is a shady person. We are done now. A quick point: because of that Activation, any captain can benefit from Jackabog as Duty Officer, and consistent Military gain with two card draw is pretty great, not to mention another potential encounter for dismissing Ships! Don't let the Pakleds fool you, and don't let Rebner get this card if you're opposing him.
↑ back to top Landru
Notable Episodes: TOS 1x22: The Return of the Archons & LD 1x10: No Small Parts
Landru was an ancient philosopher of Beta III who brought tranquility except sometimes when everybody went super violent. After being exposed and out-logic'ed by Kirk and Spock, the citizens of Beta III went back to following him a century later.
It's kind of funny that Landru's a Person card since he's a lot older than anyone in the Starfleet era. But since the projection of Landru is just that, a projection, he can't be played. He can be your Duty Officer, and you can beam person cards to him (become one with Landru!). Once you have two person cards there, you can log them for an action (as long as you have at least two Influence) to draw the top Location and take control of it. The best part? You get to recall Landru and can do this again. I love cards that let you get more locations, so I'm looking forward to pulling this off. Finding cards that can refresh a Duty Officer will be crucial here, or it will take three total turns to get any use out of Landru.
↑ back to top Malcolm Reed
Notable Episodes: ENT 1x16: Shuttlepod One , 2x9: Singularity , 3x15: Harbinger , & 4x15: Affliction
Malcolm Reed takes his job seriously (too seriously, sometimes). When he's not writing letters to all his ex-girlfriends, he's constantly worried about the weapons capabilities of the first warp 5 Starfleet ship, and he's working to improve combat readiness. Who knows, maybe they'll end up naming the alert system after him (Reed alert?).
Reed has the Security and Ops traits, along with the obligatory Human, Starfleet, and NX-01. I love the resupply if you have an engineer (Tucker) in play, because it's very thematic. The reaction will be useful most of the game as ships are constantly coming and going, and the flexibility to send more Away Teams or find a Weapon is great. His play action is also great, giving you Military advancement of one plus one for every Augment, Xindi, or Romulan in your discard pile. For a deck like Archer's this could be really fun, but it also would be nice for Sela. And of course, everyone can benefit from Malcolm Reed when it comes to "Reed Alert".
↑ back to top Malik
Notable Episodes: ENT 4x4: Borderland , 4x5: Cold Station 12 , & 4x6: The Augments
An "Enterprise" era Augment, Malik was one of the "children" of Arik Soong. He had previously been a frozen embryo on Cold Station 12, due to the Federation ban on Augments but refusal to dispose of the embryos. Eventually he fought against the will of Soong, going so far as to kill several of his augment siblings in pursuit of his intention to rule over humans by starting a war with the Klingons.
The first stand-out mechanism here is the passive ability that gives him a Military skill for each Augment in-play, up to three (but at least one). His reaction lets you discard a card to gain an action token when you put an attack card in play, which is also great. His Attack Free Play action lets you steal a Glory from an opponent, the first card I'm seeing with that ability in the game. He can also get you a development for the cost of logging a Human/Klingon, then self-logging Malik. You would think this card would work well in an augment deck like Khan's, but Khan doesn't care about Malik's military skills as he has no tracks. However, Khan can still benefit from his Augment trait, and grabbing a Development is great whether or not you care about Augment cards.
↑ back to top Petra Aberdeen
Notable Episodes: LD 3x5: Reflections & 3x10: The Stars at Night
Petra is a former Starfleet officer turned archeologist who sets up a booth at a career fair on Tulgana IV, and antagonizes Mariner and Boimler to create an opportunity to "liberate" the Grand Nagus' staff from the Museum of Antiquities. So, like a reverse Indiana Jones? "This doesn't belong in a museum!"
Petra lets you gain cards, log them, and gain Glory. If it happens to have the Ancient trait (new trait!), you draw two cards, which sounds nice until you realize there aren't any market cards in TBG with the Ancient trait. There is one in Second Contact, and there are a few more encounters with Ancient traits, but I don't know how useful this ability is at the moment. Her Activations gain her Latinum and spend Latinum to gain Research, and she has that Research skill too. She may not be my first choice to grab most of the time, but if I need to make progress up the Research track (or just want to gain points without having a thick deck), I'll try to recruit her back to Starfleet.
↑ back to top President Rillak
Notable Episodes: DIS 4x4: All is Possible , 4x13: Coming Home , & 5x9: Lagrange Point
Laira Rillak is the President of the Federation in the 32nd Century. Human, Bajoran, and Cardassian, she is introduced in the fourth season of Discovery as someone who is skeptical of Burnham's leadership style.
I'm initially surprised by her Play action thematically, as she can return any number of beamed Incidents, and if you return at least two you gain two Glory (a six point shift from -4 to +2). While I typically consider this level of Incident management to be more of the purview of Kelpiens and Doctors, I think that this works, as her time as an Ambassador and diplomat give her experience diffusing volatile situations. Her reaction turns Utilize or Inspire into a free play, as you'll get an Action token back after playing them. Her passive allows for another Ambassador on duty, and there are plenty of options. I've enjoyed having her both as Duty Officer, and an alternative to worrying about Incident management early in the game (just beam them to ships and make them your Captain's problems).
↑ back to top Sarina Douglas
Notable Episodes: DS9 6x9: Statistical Probabilities & 7x5: Chrysalis
Sarina was a child who underwent genetic augmentation, which unfortunately resulted in her not being able to process speech. After helping him stop a group of institutionalized Augments from leaking intel to the Dominion, Julian Bashir developed a cure for her condition and was able to restore her verbal functioning. Of course, since it's Bashir, he started a romantic relationship with her that moved way too fast, almost reversing her cure.
Sarina gets two wild Skills, which is great. Unfortunately, you'll either need to discard an Incident or take an Incident each Resupply Phase, or you have to discard her. Her activation is great, and allows you to free play an Incident from your discard pile, which makes taking an incident to keep her around less of an issue. Her play action is free, and lets you free play a card with a Research skill/focus or look at the top card of a market deck after discarding a Doctor or Augment. I love this card, and she's a great Duty Officer, so long as you can manage those Incidents.
↑ back to top Soji Asha
Notable Episodes: PIC 1x6: The Impossible Box & 1x9-10: Et in Arcadia Ego
Soji Asha has memories… programmed into her by Bruce Maddox and Altan Soong, using a single positronic neuron of the late Lieutenant Commander Data. Her cover at the Borg Reclamation Project was a ruse in order to learn more about the purpose and origin of the Synthetic attack on Mars.
"The Android who didn't know she was an Android" from Picard Season One, Soji has some pretty typical Synthetic/Android archetype abilities. She can free play to log a card, gaining a Dilithium. Her reaction also lets you log a card from your hand when you put a Synthetic into play, drawing a card for every five in your log. But, thematic to Soji and her Borg reclamation project, you can spend two Dilithium to scan for a Borg card. Something tells me that this will be handy down the line… And that something is the obvious Borg captain foreshadowing. I think the only situation (currently) where I wouldn't care to take Soji from the market would be if I knew for a fact there was no Borg probe in the market anymore, and limited Borg cards elsewhere. Even then, she's useful for logging cards so I'd still consider it.
↑ back to top Thelev
Notable Episodes: TOS 2x15: Journey to Babel
An Orion infiltrating a Federation Peace conference while posing as an Andorian, Thelev was unmasked by Captain Kirk. He murdered the Tellarite ambassador Gav and tried to pin the murder on Spock's father, Sarek!
A card like Thelev makes me want to watch more of the original series. An Orion posing as an Andorian to disrupt a Federation conference is peak Trek, and Thelev reflects his theme well. His free play action gains you one Latinum for each Ambassador you have in play, and a card for each Ambassador your opponent has in play. Then, you may refresh a Duty Officer if you have six… Treachery? Oh boy, just like Collective and the Badlands, we're getting future teases for this game, which makes me thrilled for expansion support, hopefully for a long time to come. He also has the archetype Passive for Spy traits, where he increases hand size by two (though there's an Influence requirement) and he scores for Military Focus.
↑ back to top Travis Mayweather
Notable Episodes: ENT 1x10: Fortunate Son , 2x20: Horizon , 4x20: Demons , & 4x21: Terra Prime
Bright-eyed ensign and helmsman of the NX-01 Enterprise, Mayweather grew up on the Horizon, a long-haul transport in the early days of human space exploration. He was the chief pilot of the Enterprise and many away team missions (and he was constantly hurting himself during athletic recreation on alien planets).
Mayweather's free play action lets you send up to two Away teams, which is useful for nearly every captain, including Archer. He's also got a pretty decent reaction that can give you a free warp and extra action tokens. I had a discussion with someone else in the playtesting group about whether Mayweather is overpowered, and while he is for sure powerful, my opinion is that he's in line with a typical Reserve card, which is how Archer will use him during a scan. If other players can get to him first (or in games without Archer) I think he'll be extremely sought-after.
↑ back to top Va'Al Trask
Notable Episodes: SNW 2x8: Under the Cloak of War
Va'Al Trask tried to recruit Joseph M'Benga to kill a Klingon General during the Federation-Klingon war. His death inspired M'Benga to finish the job.
I like that we're seeing more Andorian traits in this box, and the two Military skills are helpful as well. Scanning for a weapon is cool, and logging another person card is likely achievable, meaning you'll also be gaining the Glory and promoting Trask to Duty Officer. I like the Resupply that rewards you for the number of Away Teams out on neutral locations, and I can't think of another Resupply that we've seen that relies on your presence in the Neutral Zone. A great deterrent against an opponent that won't just let you take locations without a fight.
↑ back to top Vice Admiral Pasalk
Notable Episodes: SNW 2x2: Ad Astra per Aspera & 3x8: Four-and-a-Half Vulcans
Was Una's lawyer's argument pretty weak in Ad Astra per Aspera? I think so (you usually have to declare an intention to pursue asylum, you can't just luck into it). But was Vice Admiral Pasalk super obnoxious and vindictive? Absolutely. This Vulcan sees augments as an inherent threat to the Federation, and isn't interested in bending the rules for anyone, not even a distinguished First Officer.
He has a free play attack that reflects his disdain for Augments, forcing his opponent to discard one card (two if your opponent has an Augment in play, subsequently gaining a Glory). His Resupply lets you draw and discard a card once, and then again for every ongoing card in play, which can potentially be pretty awesome for deck cycling. He also has Special text that prevents your opponent from using reactions on your turn as long as Pasalk is your Duty Officer or in your staging area (not beamed). Super effective set of abilities, and I'm interested to see how he actually works in practicality. This is one of those cards that will be instrumental to messing with your opponent's Reactions, not just in To Boldly Go, but when people are potentially mixing way too many common market cards together.
↑ back to top ← Back to Compendium
