Introduction
Welcome to another strategy guide for Star Trek Captain's Chair: To Boldly Go! Today we get to travel into the great unknown and preview the new Encounter Deck. I'd urge caution though, as there are new Incidents as well. There are still eight encounters in the box, and we have three repeats:
Guardian of Forever
Koala
V'Ger
Unless we were to get multiple cards with the same effect as Koala (which would be bad for balance), I think having Koala in this box makes complete sense. Wildcard as a trait is so powerful on its own that Koala perfectly limits the usefulness to beaming. Guardian of Forever is another really great one, though it would be cool to maybe get alternate Original Series art for it one of these days. V'Ger is a logging workhorse and about the only thing I'd want to add from The Motion Picture (except maybe Ilia and Commander Decker), so it continues to make sense to include it. Though maybe we could get "Ki ty Ha" instead at some point (See Lower Decks 3x8: Crisis Point 2: Paradoxus). Onto the new stuff!
New Encounters
Delphic Expanse Sphere
Notable Appearances: ENT Season 3, notably 3x2: Anomaly , 3x22: The Council , & 3x24: Zero Hour
Featured in Enterprise season three, these spheres were scattered around the Delphic Expanse and were hidden by a cloaking barrier. They were creating subspace Anomalies and actually formed the Delphic Expanse, changing it slowly to more resemble the trans-dimensional space occupied by the Sphere Builders.
This Encounter has a military skill and Anomaly trait, and it gains the Wildcard trait when there's an anomaly in your Fleet Area and Delphic Expanse Sphere is in your Staging Area. It allows you to either scan for 1 of a Person, Cargo, Ship, Ally or Mission (?) and gain two Dilithium, or for a free action you can send an Away team to a controlled location and gain a Dilithium or Latinum for each Xindi you have in play. My initial thoughts is that this is a great card for the flexibility to gain what you need to gain from the market, which can be difficult sometimes if you're waiting for the right directive to get reshuffled and drawn. It also has some resource generation, but I'm also not going to discount that Wildcard trait Special text. It will be interesting to see which captains make the most of this Encounter.
And as a side note, I love that David, Adam, and Nigel keep giving us these sneak peaks at what's to come. An added common deck for Mission card suits is intriguing on so many levels and it will be really cool to revisit this encounter someday to determine how pivotal it is to gaining new Missions, whatever that process may look like.
↑ Back to top Gomtuu
Notable Appearance: TNG 3x20: Tin Man
"Tin Man," this powerful alien was also a ship to a crew that had previously died, causing it to wander the galaxy for millennia searching vainly for more of its kind. The Betazoid telepath Tam Elbrun and Gomtuu formed a relationship, after which Elbrun convinced Gomtuu not to commit suicide by supernova, which had the added bonus of keeping it out of Romulan hands.
Gomtuu gets a spread of useful traits, including Alien, Ancient, and Telepath, as well as Attack and Ongoing. Its special text indicates it functions as a Ship (with standee) and it's deployed to the Fleet area as a free action. You can spend an action token to gain a military for each Research skill you have in play. It has two activations, one to warp, and one to beam a card and warp an opponent's ship away from its location to another neutral location (thematic as it was able to send the Enterprise-D 3.8 billion kilometers from its observing location). I really like this encounter, especially since controlling locations can sometimes be a drag when you have an opponent overwhelming you with ships. Now you can just push them away.
↑ Back to top New Federation Applicants
Notable Appearance: Star Trek: Insurrection (Movie)
In Star Trek Insurrection, Picard welcomes the Evora, a newly warp capable species, into the Federation. This is notable because the Federation is actively seeking allies in the wake of the Dominion War. The Evora then appear a few times in DS9, Voyager, and Lower Decks.
First, this encounter gets a wild Focus scoring, where you score for your best track. They also have two free play actions, the first of which allows you to take an Incident to draw two cards. Then you can beam an Incident to a deployed ship with Starfleet to gain a Glory. This would be mildly inconvenient, except that the second free play action lets you return a beamed Incident to refresh a location, which is fantastic. Getting the right location refreshed can lead to insane turns, so this Encounter is a high priority for me.
↑ Back to top Species 10-C
Notable Appearance: Discovery Season 4, in particular 4x12: Species 10-C
The Alien species behind the Dark Matter Anomaly in Discovery season four, Species 10-C was a threat when they began mining for boronite in the form of destroying numerous star systems.
This Encounter gets the Alien, Creature, and Communication traits, as well as Special text making them an Ally for all purposes. Its first play free action gains the user one space on any research track. The second play action allows you to select a controlled location, and then find any card (except your reserves) for each trait and skill icon on the location. Then you log the selected location, and gain a glory if there's another Communication in play. At first blush I don't necessarily love this Encounter because gaining only one on a track is underwhelming, and logging a planet you could use for Strange New Worlds feels inefficient. But, if you can free play it a few times a game, that could save you a whole use of Utilize or bump you up a focus scoring multiplier at the end of the game. Also, in reference to logging locations, you're able to use this to find a lot of cards, potentially, and it basically guarantees you control over your hand for the rest of the turn. If you've got plenty of controlled locations with a decent number of traits and skills, this is a pretty amazing card. I think it's situational and the earlier you get it the more effective it is for track gain, and the later you get it the more useful it is for finding cards.
↑ Back to top Stone of Gol
Notable Appearances: TNG 7x4-5: Gambit
When Picard fakes his death and pretends to be his old teacher Galen, he's half-archeologist, half-captive while searching for an ancient Vulcan weapon (hence the traits), the Stone of Gol.
In addition to an influence skill, there's a free play attack that forces your opponent to dismiss their duty officers or exhaust them and you gain glory. Otherwise, you can attack with a play action that forces your opponent to take an Incident, you gain an attack including from the junk, and if you have a Telepath in play you can free play the gained attack. I like the theme here (gaining glory if your attack doesn't dismiss an opponent because you've learned to use logic to control your aggressive emotions) and I appreciate the ability to double up that card with a free-play attack, if you can guarantee the Telepath in play. Another excellent addition.
↑ Back to top New Incidents
There's also a couple new Incidents and four that remain the same:
Hostile Contact
Political Crisis
Subspace Phenomenon
Trade Embargo
Dilithium Shockwave
Notable Appearances: Discovery Season 3, in particular DIS 3x13: That Hope Is You, Part 2
When Su'Kal loses his mother due to radiation poisoning, he somehow activates Dilithium across the galaxy causing any ships with an active warp core to suffer a warp core breach.
It's nice to get a really weird one in the deck, and an Incident based on the Burn itself is pretty meta. You have to spend all of your Dilithium to return it, and your opponent gains two Dilithium. Thankfully, spend "all" here can equal zero. You can also return this card if you have a Kelpien in play, and then you can optionally spend three Dilithium to gain a glory. There's also some special Bot resolution text on this one. When playing with this Incident (and you won't always know in advance if you're shuffling in promo Incidents), you'll want to avoid excessive Dilithium gain, or get your Kelpiens in play asap.
↑ Back to top Reed Alert
Notable Appearance: ENT 2x9: Singularity
"I appreciate your concern Malcolm but this isn't a warship." "Well, that's obvious, sir."
This is just Red Alert for Malcolm Reed, and if he's in play you'll gain a Glory in addition to the standard Red Alert text. Not much to mention here, and it's probably not worth seeking out this extra Glory, just a fun bonus if you happen to have him in play when you return this Incident.
↑ Back to top
