The Location deck in To Boldly Go is familiar to those who own the base game, but with some twists. We once again have 10 Starting locations and 10 Advanced locations. Six of the Starting Locations are repeats from the first box, and they are Ancient Relay Station, Archer IV, Delta Vega, Dozaria, Indri VIII, and Risa. That leaves four new ones, and they're pretty fun additions.
↑ back to top Starting Locations
Six of the ten Starting Locations are repeats from the base game. The four new additions are covered below.
Argus Array
1 Wild Skill
Traits: Communication, Starfleet
Control: No Effect
Resupply: You may discard a card to draw a card from your discard pile.
0 Points
Notable Appearances: TNG:4x19: The Nth Degree & 7x11: Parallels
Didn't this get destroyed? Oh, wait, that was just a parallel timeline where Worf couldn't figure out how the weapons LCARS configurations worked. The 0 points here makes total sense to me, because this is a great Starting Location even without any points. The wild skill offers excellent flexibility, and the Communication trait comes in handy quite often (in particular with the Hostile Contact Incident). The Resupply really shines, as you may discard a card to draw a card from your discard pile. Obviously, you're not always going to have cards in your discard pile (what if you just reshuffled at the end of your last turn?). But unlike the random draw and discard of Archer IV, this gives you more autonomy and lets you pull a great discarded card to use again.
↑ back to top Cold Station 12
1 Research Skill
Traits: Augment, Starbase
Control: You may beam a card from your hand or discard pile here.
Resupply: You may spend 1 Dilithium to recall a card from here.
Reaction: After discarding a card during your Action Step, beam the discarded card here.
Endgame: Score 1 point for each Augment beamed here.
1 Point
Notable Appearances: ENT: 4x5: Cold Station 12 & 4x6: The Augments
Cold Station 12 is a medical storage facility for pathogens… and people. Augment embryos, to be precise. It makes sense that you can beam cards there as part of your control or Reaction, and you can get them back by spending some Dilithium. It's our first Starting Location with Endgame points, which means you'll only get that benefit if you don't have it logged (and you'll lose your beamed cards if you log the location). But the potential for thinning the deck and gaining some Augment points with Khan and the Augment-friendly market makes it appealing. I will say that in solo play, the worry that the Bot will take this location early is present against Neutral Zone rushing-bots like Sela. It's often worth fighting over simply to avoid giving the Bot an early point boon.
↑ back to top Denaxi Depot
Traits: Xindi, Shady, Business
Control: You may discard a card to send an Away Team here. If the discarded card is Business, gain 2 Latinum
Activation [Action]: Remove an away team from here to gain a Ship.
Activation: Spend 1 Latinum and discard a card to find a Ship, except in your Reserve deck.
1 Point
Notable Appearance: PRO 1x14: Crossroads
I'm a big fan of Prodigy and this location features prominently into the first season, as the kids look to find a ship after ditching their old one. I like the thematic tie-in that you can get a ship here, keeping in mind that it's not that cheap to do so (away team costs and action token). And hey, if you're looking for some Xindi to make friends with (cough, Archer, cough), this is a great Starting Location. I applaud newer iterations of Trek for briefly revisiting the Xindi, and an animated series like Prodigy was a great place to do so.
↑ back to top Tahal-Meeroj
Traits: Anomaly
Control: You may enlist a reserve. Draw 2 cards.
Special: When you log this card, gain 2 Research.
3 Points
Notable Appearances: VOY 6x12: Blink of an Eye & SFA: 1x8 The Life of the Stars (Mentioned)
For those who don't care about the lore of Star Trek, this location is pretty straightforward. Enlisting a Reserve is great and then you get to immediately take that Reserve card. The 2 Research is likewise a nice benefit, and many captains and cards like the Anomaly trait so all of that makes this a great Starting Location to fight over. And once you have it, you're incentivized to use Strange New Worlds to get those Research benefits, and you have no skills to worry about losing.
When it comes to the lore, I've actually re-written this paragraph in recent months due to an update from Starfleet Academy. Initially, I was having trouble placing the name of this location, and that's because it was never actually said by anyone on-screen until very recently. This is Kelemane's planet (aka "The Weird Planet Displaced in Time") that Voyager gets stuck in and ends up drastically altering their cultural development. The name Tahaj-Meeroj comes from a short story about the Doctor's eighteen minutes (three years) on the planet. But in the recently aired Starfleet Academy, The Doctor references this planet with the name Gotana, which likely comes from Daniel Dae Kim's character Gotana-Retz who first boarded Voyager and returned to his own time 80-something years later. Anyway, imagine the laugh the dev team must have had working hard to find a name for this location only to have Starfleet Academy rename it before the game actually gets into players hands!
↑ back to top Advanced Locations
Moving on to the Advanced Locations, take note of these five repeats: Kelvas Docks, Verex III, Memory Alpha, Xahea, and Solum. Solum comes with an updated Vau N'akat Trait, so be sure to use it if you're combining boxes. It's the only Vau N'akat trait in the game so far… I'll let you all speculate as to what that could mean. The remaining five Advanced Locations are as follows:
Azati Prime
2 Research and 1 Military Skill
Traits: Xindi, Engineer
Control: You may put a card on the top of your deck to gain a Cargo/Ship. If the gained card is a Weapon, gain 2 Glory.
Endgame: Score 1 point for each of your Xindi cards
2 Points
Notable Appearance: ENT 3x18: Azati Prime
The location of the underwater construction yard for the Xindi weapon, the vast number of skills make thematic sense from a Research and Military perspective, but it also makes this location very valuable. Gaining Cargo or a Ship upon control is also quite powerful and thematic, and Endgame scoring for Xindi cards is likewise on-point. I'm looking forward to trying this one out with a Xindi-heavy (Archer) or a Blue/Red (Georgiou, Riker) strategy. Also, I just love having Engineer traits in play.
↑ back to top Babel One
1 Influence Skill
Traits: Ambassador, Communication
Control: No effect.
Resupply: Draw a card for each Communication you have in play (excluding this card, max 3)
Endgame: Requires 6 Influence — Score 1 point for each Communication/Ambassador you have in play.
2 Points
Notable Appearances: Referenced in TOS 2x15 Journey to Babel and ENT 4x12 Babel One .
Babel One is a frequently referenced location for peace talks between Federation species and prospective applicants to the Federation. Interesting note, I'm not sure that we've ever seen it on-screen, so I don't know where the artist got the reference picture for the planet. This is the first endgame scoring card that has a Skill requirement. That makes sense, as potential three-card draw is quite powerful. The biggest downside is that, as an Advanced Location, who knows if you'll have time to really take advantage of that benefit. Still, great theme, cool Advanced Location mechanics.
↑ back to top Khitomer
No Skills
Traits: Human, Klingon, Romulan
Control: You may free play a Starfleet. This is not an Attack.
Reaction: After your opponent puts an Attack into play, they take an Incident.
Reaction: After you log an Attack or card with Military Skill/Focus, gain an Action Token.
Influence Focus
Notable Appearances: ST VI: The Undiscovered Country , Referenced in TNG 3x17 Sins of the Father & 6x17-18: Birthright
Khitomer is the location of both a Federation-Klingon peace treaty, and also a Romulan attack, which logically lends to the three species traits. I like the benefit of a Starfleet free-play, but the reaction is where this really shines. You can either defensively use this to give your opponent Incidents when they attack, or gain extra actions via logging attacks or Military skill/focus cards. Really looking forward to using this one defensively, especially with captains who don't really have a great defensive toolkit.
↑ back to top Tanuga IV
1 Research and 1 Military Skill
Traits: Scientist, Starbase
Control: You may spend 3 Dilithium to scan for either a Scientist or a Weapon.
Clean-up: Gain 1 Latinum for each Weapon you have in play (max 3) OR gain 1 Dilithium for each Scientist you have in play (Max 4).
5 Points
Notable Appearance: TNG 3x14: A Matter of Perspective
This is the location of the Tanuga IV research station where Riker got to be the main suspect in a holodeck game of Clue trial. Tanuga IV reflects that duality, as the Research skill can be used for science… or you can use the military skill as aggression against your wife's crush. The points here are good, and it's a nice clean-up ability for some consistent resource accumulation, which I often find is an issue when I get into Developments. As the commons decks get more crowded, the ability to scan will also come more and more handy.
↑ back to top Tellar Prime
2 Influence Skills
Traits: Tellarite, Starfleet
Control: No effect.
Activation: Discard a card to Find an Incident
Activation: Put a card on the top of your deck to send an Away Team to a Location with Starfleet.
Endgame: Score 1 point for each controlled location with Starfleet/Starbase you have in play.
2 Points
Notable Appearance: ENT 4x12: Babel One
The Tellerite card archetype is focused around Incidents and giving them to your opponent (Tevrin Kritt not withstanding) and so I appreciate that you can use the Tellarite homeworld to find Incidents, then use your other Tellarite cards (or doctors) to dispose of them. I'm not discounting the usefulness of sending an away team every round as well, but since that's only to locations with Starfleet the usefulness will be limited. However, if you happen to have Sisko as your captain, this pairs super well with his Endgame scoring.
↑ back to top
