Introduction
We've got 13 total ships (same as the core box), with five new ones. Here's the returning ships, and the updates to them:
Borg Probe
D'Kyr Cruiser
Holographic Drone Ship (Updated text to match the errata from the FAQ)
Kazon Raider (Added Kazon trait)
Pakled Freighter
U.S.S. Enterprise-C (Updated text to match the errata from the FAQ)
U.S.S. Pasteur
Xindi-Reptillian Battleship
Getting official versions of the changes to the Holo Drone Ship and Enterprise-C is great, and their abilities are good enough to be valuable in multiple boxes. Keeping the Xindi-Reptilian Battleship will be good for Captain Archer. The Kazon now get a specific trait, which bodes well for their future in the game. Also glad to see the Pakled Freighter again for Rebner (and everybody else who just likes gaining Cargo from the junk). Now, without further delay, here's the new stuff:
New Ships
D'Kora Marauder
Notable Episodes: TNG 1x5: The Last Outpost, 1x9: The Battle, 3x24: Ménage à Troi, et al.
It's clear to me that the Ferengi were intended to be the big-bad of The Next Generation, but thankfully there was a pivot back to the Romulans by the season finale. Still, I kind of like the mystery that was associated with this ship when it was first introduced. Directed energy weapons sounded more intriguing than they ended up being in practice.
Ferengi should automatically get the Business trait no matter what, right? That's just good business. It's fitting that it steals a Latinum when it's deployed, and that you can spend Latinum to send an Away Team to its location without having to spend an action token. I like that Military skill as well. War is good for business.
↑ Back to top D'Var
Notable Episode: SNW: 2x7: Those Old Scientists
An Orion scout ship, the D'Var appeared in Strange New World's crossover with Lower Decks called "Those Old Scientists." D'Vana Tendi's grandma was on board, and they're scientists, not pirates. Well, they're at least pirate scientists.
I usually go for this ship simply because you can deploy it for free, often simply using it for location control. Alternatively, if your captain can get past the 4 Influence restriction, you can circumvent the need for using Utilize or Inspire repeatedly while still advancing on the Research track (you can use wild skills as well). It's definitely going to be a popular ship in the new set simply for utility, and it also combos extremely well with Second Contact's Kruluth B location.
↑ Back to top Medusan Vessel
Notable Episodes: TOS 3x7: Is There in Truth No Beauty? & PRO 1x16: Preludes
Another ship with both an original series origin (see "Is there in Truth no Beauty?", totally not featuring a young Doctor Pulaski Diana Muldaur) and a recent appearance in Star Trek Prodigy season one (as Zero's scout ship prior to his kidnapping and imprisonment on Tars Lamora). It carries a non-corporal hive-mind crew that will drive most humanoids insane if they set eyes on them.
I like the research skill, reflecting the purpose of this vessel. The Alien trait is likewise appropriate, and the ability to scan for Telepaths every time it's deployed is great too. Anything that allows for a scan will only get better the more niche the trait is and the more traits that are added to the market. I look forward to finding as many telepaths from the market as possible. Remember, use it to control locations often, so it can cycle through your deck and you can keep scanning.
↑ Back to top Vor'cha Attack Cruiser
Notable Episodes: TNG: 4x7: Reunion , 4x26 & 5x1: Redemption , et al.
A common ship during the TNG and DS9 era, the Vor'cha class was well-established in the Klingon defense force during the Klingon-Cardassian and Dominion wars.
The core deck had the K't'inga Battlecruiser, but this deck gets a cloaked Klingon Attack Cruiser. Due to the mechanical nature of the cloaked ship ability, this ship gets to send out an away team as part of its deploy action. It also gets the Away Team Activation (costing an Action Token) that is common to Koloth's ships. I like that flexibility to send an extra away team, especially when you find yourself suddenly with no cards and a single remaining action. I don't constantly use those abilities, but it's nice to have them when they're relevant.
↑ Back to top Xindi-Aquatic Cruiser
Notable Episodes: ENT 3x23: Countdown & 3x24: Zero Hour
The Xindi-Aquatics were the most technologically advanced of the five living Xindi species, with giant ships filled with water and able to carry and transport other ships via warp travel.
Archer's going to have a field day with these Xindi. Two Influence skills? I love to see it. It also seems like this ship is a beaming work-horse, with a beaming Activation and a beam upon deploying it. Warping costs two Dilithium, but then you get to free play a previously beamed card aboard this ship (it is a carrier after all, memorably free playing launching the NX-01 Enterprise itself into battle). That's fantastic, and makes this a must-get when it comes up.
↑ Back to top ← Back to Compendium
