Introduction
There are eighteen cards in the Cargo Deck for To Boldly Go. Ten are repeats, and eight are new. For starters, here's a look at what's staying the same:
Borg Spatial Trajector (updated, but irrelevant… for now)
Cloaking Device
Forced Singularity
Holosuite
Horta
Lirpa (with a new card draw limit of five)
Orb of Time (with added Transcendent trait)
Phasers (action token requirement removed from the first Play Action)
Plasma Manifold
Type III Disruptor Pistols
First off, Phasers is significantly improved with this boost, as you have a more compelling reason to deploy without having to spend the action token. This makes it a no-brainer to pick it up when you can. I'm glad to see universally beneficial cards like Forced Singularity and Cloaking Device make a repeat appearance, and it's nice to have Horta as well. Orb of Time will continue to lead to recall shenanigans, which is great. And having Lirpa in the deck will be nice for Soval (though as the new limit suggests, not too nice).
New Cargo Cards
For the eight new Cargo cards, we've got a nice spread of Captain-specific help and general-use cards. Here's my introduction and some initial strategy musings:
Augmentation Plague
Notable Appearances: ENT 4x15: Affliction & 4x16: Divergence
The Klingon-Augment virus has been used since the era of Enterprise to explain why Original Series Klingons looked different from the TNG-era Klingons (Discovery/SNW just decided that they look different sometimes, stop asking questions).
This card has a fairly steep deploy cost at an action token, three Dilithium, and a Latinum, but you'll gain two military and if you're playing with a Klingon captain you can draw three cards at the cost of an Incident. There are two reactions, one that forces your opponent to discard a card when they play a card with the Klingon trait, and the other which gives you a glory when you put a Klingon in play. I'll be honest, this is pretty underwhelming to me in this particular box, but will be devastating against Koloth and potential upcoming Klingon-focused captains. It will make playing Ash Tyler and Lursa more difficult, but I think we won't see the majority of the potential here until it's used while combining boxes. It does have a blue focus and some excellent traits.
↑ back to top Computer Virus
Notable Appearances: DS9 5x13: For the Uniform
There have been so many Computer Viruses so many times, but I have it on good authority (Read: Dávid Turczi) that this specific virus is the cascade virus that Eddington unleashes on the U.S.S. Defiant. That's a great episode, by the way, so I won't spoil it anymore.
I like the military skill with the Engineering and Communication traits (always useful to have out there). The free-play attack is great, forcing your opponent to take incidents if they have no beamed cards. The reaction is also great, as you can get the card back to attack again anytime your opponent warps their ship. However, the card is logged when your opponent puts a Security/Engineer in play. I think this card is one to watch out for. I actually learned about it at GenCon during my Soval-Georgiou game against Adam Turczi, and because I just wasn't paying very good attention he was about to get this out there several times, and I didn't have the right traits to force him to log it. Alternatively, in a multiplayer Rebner-Georgiou game where I grabbed this, my opponent quickly put a security officer in play, dealing with it swiftly (and delaying my completion of a mission). I think Computer Virus will be a desired cargo card and will require players to be aware of the potential pitfalls while it's in the deck.
↑ back to top Eva Suits
Notable Appearances: First Contact (Movie), ENT 1x8: Breaking the Ice , 2x3: Minefield , & 2x12: The Catwalk
Often seen in Enterprise, Discovery, and even The Original Series, Eva Suits are necessary in situations where repairs need to be made despite inhospitable environments. Eva Suits have helmets, so have fun, Pakleds!
Eva suits are a way to help thin your deck and send Away teams at the same time. When you deploy Eva suits (for an action token) you beam a person to Eva suits, and can continue doing so using your Activation. Once you're ready, you can use the Reaction to send Away Teams to a location after you warp a ship there, and then Eva suits is dismissed. I like it, especially since you won't be losing any of those person cards permanently. Theme is on point, and I always like more options for getting Away Teams where they need to be. If I have any issue with it, it's that there's not a ton of cards that refresh cargo, so it'll take a few turns to get this fully up to speed to send three teams.
↑ back to top Jago's Epigenetic Implant
Notable Appearances: PRO 1x15: Masquerade
Prodigy is getting lots of love in this expansion, which makes me happy because that show is really great Star Trek. Jago is a doctor working illegally outside the Federation in the Neutral Zone, and his implant can activate dormant augmented genes. It's a great subtle callback to Dr. Bashir in DS9 as well, as we never actually get to see his parents take him to a doctor outside the Federation for genetic manipulation. Jago is basically doing the exact same thing, only in the Romulan Neutral Zone.
EDIT: (An original version of this paragraph had inaccurate text based on an older printing of this card. That image did NOT go to print. The updated image is attached, along with strategy for that card).
This cargo requires an action token and discard to deploy, but if you discard a Doctor or Business card, you also get two Latinum and an Incident free-play. There's also a Resupply that lets you draw and discard cards based on the number of Augment traits you have in play, and this box does have quite a few of them. Just be aware of the dismissal that can happen if you don't have a Duty Officer. Khan is not as concerned about deck cycling as some captains, so this won't necessarily be that appealing to him for enlisting purposes, but it's always nice to be able to discard cards you don't want to make the ideal starting hand.
↑ back to top Kemocite
Notable Appearances: ENT 3x07: The Shipment , mentioned briefly in DS9 4x8: Little Green Men & VOY 5x26 & 6x1: Equinox
The key ingredient in the Xindi weapon, Kemocite also is referenced in Voyager and DS9 a few times. Weapons-grade Kemocite was processed at a Xindi-Arboreal colony before being transported to Azati Prime.
Kemocite has three different actions (following the precious/pet card archetype that I hope Dávid will write a designer diary about at some point), and I like that level of flexibility. The most straightforward has an action token cost and allows you to scan for a weapon for one Dilithium. A different free play action lets you find and free play a weapon, taking an Incident if it was found in your reserve deck. Finally, you have a free play action that lets you dismiss a ship and recall a non-time travel card, and draw two cards (in line with the Time Travel trait archetype). I really like this addition and I think that Shran's going to want it whenever he gets a chance to go up against Captains Archer and Soval. Always be on the lookout early for cards that let you Find from your Reserve, because it will significantly improve your game tempo.
↑ back to top Medical Diagnostic Hat
Notable Appearances: TNG 1x7: Lonely Among Us
The rarely seen (if ever again) Medical Diagnostic hat is worn by Dr. Crusher while she is treating Lieutenant Worf after a weird entity transfers into him (and subsequently into her, and then Picard). Another helmet in the cargo deck (which means anybody can benefit from Jackabog's helmet desires, not just Rebner).
This one lets you draw a card for each Alien and Doctor you have in play, up to five. You also get to draw a person from your discard pile and free play an Incident from your hand or discard pile. That's some pretty good flexibility and card draw, so I certainly wouldn't ignore this card if it came along. Still, by itself without other Doctor/Alien cards it may be a bit weak.
↑ back to top Saurian Brandy
Notable Appearances: TOS 3x21: Requiem for Methuselah , et al.
Saurian Brandy has been a mainstay of Star Trek from the Original Series up until Strange New Worlds (which was before the Original Series, but you get it). As a side note, the inclusion of Beverages as cargo in this game is inspired, as there are not only many, many examples, but they often have species traits associated with them, making for excellent mechanically useful cards.
An Alien Beverage, it naturally allows you can spend an action token and two Latinum to scan two from the Person deck, including from the junk, then junk a card. As a reminder, scanning from the junk for suits means you look at the scanned cards, the face-up market card, and the entirety of the junk, then make your choice. Saurian Brandy also has a free play action at five influence that lets you gain a Latinum for each Starfleet trait you have in play (up to 3) and you get to refresh your captain and duty officer. I've found that with some captains, resource generation is difficult but crucial, and having more options like this will help Starfleet captains obtain some Latinum (something humans don't usually care that much about). The flexibility of gaining from the junk will also prove more useful as players continue to combine common cards.
↑ back to top Universal Translator
Notable Appearances: ENT 1x3: Fight or Flight , DIS 2x4: An Obol for Charon , et al.
Finally, the best cargo and plot device Star Trek came up with: the Universal Translator. I've really enjoyed watching Enterprise where it's not very effective early on, and props to the creators for making a bunch of languages when it would have been easier to stick with the translator. However, I'm highlighting two episodes, one where Hoshi first starts getting it to work, and another when the Discovery's crew no longer has access to the universal translator. Ironic that I'm highlighting an episode where it fails to work, since it's in the background plot of literally every episode of every series!
The Translator's cargo's first play action lets you discard a Starfleet to scan for an Alien. The second lets you take the top encounter and discard it if you have three cards with Alien (not encounters) in play. Then you dismiss all your ships and beamed cards with Alien and log the Universal Translator. I'm a big fan of encounters that reward you for working towards a goal, and this is no exception. However, you'll need to consider whether you have the ability to get three Aliens in play early enough to make a difference. It can also mess with completing your missions, especially if you're a captain like Picard who needs those traits elsewhere.
↑ back to top ← Back to Compendium
