Introduction
Who's ready for a first contact? Today's post is a strategy guide for Captain's Chair: To Boldly Go's Ally deck. It has sixteen cards, which is three more than the core box. We also see the return of eight of the core box allies, as listed below:
Arin'sen
Bolians
Bynars
Denobulans
Kelpiens
Letheans
Organians
Suliban
Bynars, Denobulans, and Organians all have track specialty restrictions, and I think their return makes a lot of sense as basic allies. There aren't as many Klingon traits in this box, so Arin'sen may be less useful by itself, though it does provide its own Klingon trait which will be useful for multiple captains. Having Kelpiens for Incident management is great, and Bolians are nice as the rare Ally that doesn't have a self-logging Play operation. Leatheans have some great traits and a Play operation that scans for Shady characters, which is often appreciated. And I'm sure Archer (and Pike) appreciate the ability to woo the Suliban and their Time Travel trait. In addition to these repeats, here are the Ally cards joining the party:
New Allies
Kaelon II Science Ministry
Notable Episode: TNG 4x22: Half a Life
The Kaelon are introduced in an episode where Lwaxana Troi falls in love with Dr. Timicin, a man who must commit suicide due to his culture's social beliefs. His death will mean the end of his attempt to revitalize the dying Kaelon sun, but his refusal to die will affect his family and society, making him an outcast. Fun fact: the portrayed actor, David Ogden Stiers, was the voice of Cogsworth in the animated Beauty and the Beast, and his daughter in his episode (TNG 4x22 Half A Life) is played by Michelle Forbes (who also played Ro Laren).
This is our first and only Ongoing Ally card, which deploys and exhausts with three Dilithium placed. You'll gain a Research on clean-up if the card is exhausted, but if it's not you'll move a Dilithium to a Market card. Once there are no resources on this Ally, you'll log the card. Instead of throwing your Dilithium at the market, the Reaction gains you one of these Dilithium and a card draw from your discard pile after you log a Person or Directive. Efficient use of this card could result in upwards of four Research, three Dilithium and three card draw. It's an excellent an thematic use of the Kaelon, and I'm glad they did that this way instead of making Dr. Timicin a Person card. There's so many potential Person cards, especially from the Next Generation, that it's nice to spread them out with organizations and their representatives as allies. As a side note, when combining with Second Contact, I particularly like using this with Moopsy.
↑ Back to top Orion Syndicate
Notable Episode: LDS 5x2: Shades of Green
The matriarchal head of the Orion Syndicate controls the military/pirate/assassin houses of Orion. While we've heard about them for years, we first see the head of the Orion Syndicate in Lower Decks season five.
Both actions on this card are free play, and the first evaluates if you have more than three ships (gain 2 Latinum) or if your opponents have more than three deployed ships (steal two Dilithium). There's also a Treachery threshold of eight or more to find a Shady, but nobody knows what that means yet, so it's another Badlands situation. The second Play action allows you to discard a Shady to gain an action token, and draw two cards if you have another Orion in play before self-logging the Orion Syndicate. I love that we're getting more Orion cards and that an archetype is coming together for the Orion trait, which based on what we've seen relies on Laintum, Ships, stealing, and the unknown purpose of Treachery.
↑ Back to top Red Squadron
Notable Episodes: DS9 4x11: Homefront , 4x12: Paradise Lost , & 6x22: Valiant
"We let ourselves blindly follow Captain Watters, and he led us over a cliff." - Nog. Cadet Training Squadron 47 (otherwise known as Red Squadron) was a group of elite pilots just prior to and during the Dominion War. How they were not disbanded after the unrest and sabotage caused by Admiral Leyton during the Changeling invasion paranoia remains a mystery, but their own hubris led to their downfall when their training ship U.S.S. Valiant was caught behind enemy lines at the start of the Dominion War.
The first free play action has a bit of everything, from two-card draw and discard one, to beaming a staging area card to a ship, and warping a ship. The second free play action requires three Influence and lets you find a Starfleet/Dominion card, draw two cards, and force your opponent to dismiss a deployed ship before self-logging. That's a lot for one card, though it's a bit of a shame it's a one-off for the attack action. Still, when Red Squadron acts rashly, the captain cadets go down with the ship.
↑ Back to top Salt Vampires
Notable Episodes: TOS 1x5: The Man Trap & LD 1x8: Veritas
Is it a beautiful woman? Or a nearly extinct alien that sucks all the salt from horny men? Aw, Commander Ransom's totally going to make out with one of these, right? Fun fact: they were not officially named on-screen until Lower Decks, previously being described as simply a "creature," hence the Creature trait for ST:CC.
I love the simplicity here thematically and mechanically. You can draw two cards as a free action, but you're going to have to log a staging area card during clean-up. That can be really great, unless you've only played stuff you want to keep around during the round. That means playing a Salt Vampire as your first move can give you great flexibility, or limit you to the point where you have to log them or something else you wanted to keep. I think sometimes it's easy to forget how powerful a "log everything" strategy can be, so when you get Salt Vampires maybe lean into it.
↑ Back to top Tellarites
Notable Episodes: ENT 4x12: Babel One & 4x13: United , et al.
The Tellarites helping found the Federation is hilarious but also fitting, as Starfleet never expected them to change their rough and irritable personalities but rather found a way to coexist with them. That doesn't mean that they're not volatile, they certainly are, but they respect someone who will fight back.
The Tellarites use their play action to give an Incident to your opponent (This goes into their hand, and on top of their deck if it's the solo player, as it has the same effect for your opponent when they "Take" and Incident). If you have another Tellarite in play, you gain an Action token, which makes this even better if you've doubled down on the archetype or have Tellar Prime controlled. I think it's key to know that you can use this against your opponent, but more importantly, don't let them get multiple Tellarite cards unless you want to struggle with incident management or a looming Burn loss.
↑ Back to top Unimatrix Zero
Notable Episode: VOY 6x26 & 7x1: Unimatrix Zero
I know that this isn't our first Borg trait, but this is our first picture of a Borg drone so far! Unimatrix Zero appears in the Voyager season six finale episode where it's revealed that a small number of Borg appear in a holodeck-like paradise when they regenerate, and Seven of Nine was one of those Borg.
This one's interesting, because the cost is higher the more Borg you have in play, but if you have no other Borg in play the card self-logs. So having at least one other Borg trait may cost a Dilithium, but you'll get multiple chances to draw at least two cards (and up to four more for XB traits on cards). This is another card that feels like a tease for future content, while still having a use right now, including for the Research focus scoring. A potential six-card draw is a great trade for a small amount of Dilithium.
↑ Back to top Vadic's Splinter Group
Notable Episodes: PIC 3x2: Disengage through 3x8: Surrender
Vadic and her Changeling group left The Great Link after vowing revenge on the Federation post-genetic experimentation at Daystrom Station. She teamed up with the greatly diminished Borg Queen to find Jack Crusher while also sowing chaos and preparing Star Fleet personnel for a remote-assimilation via transporter modification.
There probably wasn't enough content to make a Vadic captain deck (never say never, but I'm not holding my breath), but her Splinter group of Augmented Changelings is an interesting Ally card. Per a lot of Changeling cards, you can duplicate a play operation of a Person or Cargo you or your opponent has in play (non-beamed). This costs you a person card (placed in your staging area) or you'll have to take an Incident. There's also some fun Special text that gives this card the Wildcard trait while you have a Borg trait in play, which could lead to some fun combos. It also scores for a Military focus which feels appropriate. The real question is whether this will lead to any breakable or cheesy combos, though it's functionally similar to Odo and Laas so I anticipate that issues will be relatively limited. While I don't know that I would constantly use this card, I definitely would favor it in a Person-heavy deck as there would be lots of use for duplication. And Duplicating weird text on opponent's Person or Cargo cards (especially ones unique to their Captain Deck) is something I'm excited to see. It is almost certain that this card will be less useful in solo, as the solo opponent naturally has less cargo in play, though it may give you a reason not to dismiss their Duty Officer.
↑ Back to top Vidiians
Notable Episodes: VOY 1x5: Phage , 2x19: Lifesigns , & 2x21: Deadlock
Remember when we first met these guys and they literally stole Neelix's lungs? And like, we didn't get them back, he just has one of Kes's lungs? Like, Kes only lives to age seven, wouldn't that lung fail by the end of the series? Sorry, got off track there for a second... Vidiians are an advanced species dying from the Phage, and it requires them to steal the organs of other species to survive. Supposedly, the Think Tank cured it but I don't know if I'd take Jason Alexander's Kurros' word at face value.
Okay, so this is the most interesting Ally in the deck because, like the Enterprise C and Holodrone ship, it's already getting a planned rebalancing. First, we will address the card as printed. It's pretty straightforward, with the Vidiians having a Research skill because they are very accomplished doctors (they get that trait too). But since they go around stealing organs, they're also freaking Shady. The current text lets you spend an action token to find and log a person and find and free play an Incident. If you do both, you gain a glory, if you do only one, you log Vidiians. If this seems too obviously good to you, you're not alone, but the fix may not exactly be for the reasons you think. In this iteration, I have yet to encounter the moment where I'm not going to both log a Person and return an Incident. In the rare situation where you can get this right away (or scan the Ally deck for a doctor) you could even thin your reserve as there's no prohibition on finding these cards in your Reserve deck. So as terrible as the Vidiians are as an enemy in the show, they're an awesome Ally to have in the game. Just be prepared to need some Person transplants from the common market.
I've included the updated text here which is slightly different but with an important change. First, you start with finding and free playing an Incident, meaning you still have the ability to find that card in your Reserve. However, you no longer get to find the Person card from your Reserve deck. This change is being made precisely because many captains, especially in Wave 2, have both an Incident and Person card in their Reserves. An early game grab of Vidiians could save them two or more trips through their Reserve Deck, which could be a huge tempo shift. The original reasoning suggested that players might not be willing to log Person cards from their Reserve, but that strategy has become dominant in testing among some of the best playtesters (I am not counting myself here, I'm often way too hesitant to log valuable cards). The new text allows you to log the Person card found and gain a Glory, or alternatively you can free play the Person and log Vidiians. It's still a very powerful ally, but now with slightly less tempo-breaking mechanics. The designers are recommending you play with this updated text, but most players will be fine if they don't. Like MIrok, simply print and sleeve
↑ Back to top ← Back to Compendium
